2023 
OFFICIAL PLAYING RULES OF THE NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE 
Roger Goodell, Commissioner 
 
Rule-Section-Article 
5-1-2 4-6-3; 4-7-4 
4-8-2 8-7-4 
9-1-1 10-2-4 
12-2-14 12-2-6 and 9 
12-2-8 and 10 15-1-2 
2023 Rules Changes 
Permits the use of zero (“0”) as a jersey numeral for certain positions. Allows kickers and punters to use any jersey numeral between 0-49 and 90-99. 
Makes the adjustment of the play clock following an Instant Replay reversal consistent with other timing rules. 
Prevents the offense from benefitting by an extension of the half as a result of their foul. 
Makes the penalty for handing the ball forward to an ineligible receiver behind the line of scrimmage a loss of down and five yards. 
Makes the penalty for illegal punts, drop kicks, or placekicks a loss of down and five yards. 
Puts the ball in play at the receiving team’s 25-yard line if there is a fair catch on a free kick behind the receiving team’s 25-yard line. 
Makes the penalty for tripping a personal foul (15 yards). 
Changes the definition of a launch from a player who “leaves both feet” to a player who “leaves one or both feet”. 
Clarifies the Use of the Helmet rule. Removes the “butt, ram or spear” language from Article 8 and incorporates those actions into the revised Impermissible Use of the Helmet article. 
Expands the Replay Official’s jurisdiction to allow for automatic review of a turnover on downs after a failed fourth down attempt. 
PREFACE 
This edition of the Official Playing Rules of the National Football League contains all current rules governing the playing of professional football that are in effect for the 2023 NFL season. Member clubs of the League may amend the rules from time to time, pursuant to the applicable voting procedures of the NFL Constitution and Bylaws. 
Any intra-League dispute or call for interpretation in connection with these rules will be decided by the Commissioner of the League, whose ruling will be final. 
Because inter-conference games are played throughout the preseason, regular season, and postseason in the NFL, all rules contained in this book apply uniformly to both the American and National Football Conferences. 
Where the word “illegal” appears in this rule book, it is an institutional term of art pertaining strictly to actions that violate NFL playing rules. It is not meant to connote illegality under any public law or the rules or regulations of any other organization. 
The word “flagrant,” when used here to describe an action by a player, is meant to indicate that the degree of a violation of the rules—usually a personal foul or unnecessary roughness—is extremely objectionable, conspicuous, unnecessary, avoidable, or gratuitous. “Flagrant” in these rules does not necessarily imply malice on the part of the fouling player or an intention to injure an opponent. 
Copyright © 2023 by the National Football League. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. 
Center logos, whether painted or inlayed, 3’ 
3’ 
4’ 
24’ 
24’ 
may not exceed 1200 square feet or extend beyond the 40-yard lines,whichever occurs first. Square footage will be calculated using the logo art and a 1x1 grid to accurately measure the logo. 
6’ 
12’ 
4’ 
24’ 
24’ 
6’ 
3’ 
9’ 
9’ 
160’-0” 
WALL 
22 6’-3” 
WALL 
3’ 
6’ 
SIX (6’) ALL AROUND BORDER 
21’ 7” 
3’ 
Updated: 6.30.22 



70’-9” 
3’ 
70’-9” 
6’ 
6’-3” 

PYLON 
18’-6” 
PYLON 

8” 
8” 
6’ 
2’ 2’ 
TEAM LOGO 
8” 
2’ 
Bottom of the yard line numbers must be 12 yards from the sideline 
8” 
6’ 
2’ 

12 yards 
18’-6” 
PYLON 


22 

30’- 0” 
30’-0” 
SIX (6’) ALL AROUND BORDER 
300’- 0” 
360’- 0” 
12’ 
WALL 
WALL 
PYLON PYLON 
        

 
150’ 111’ 9.5” 
135’ 7.5” 
     
NOTES 
All stadiums are required to adhere to the following minimum distances from the broken yellow border to the field wall: 
End Zone area – 3 feet Bench Area – 12 feet 
Bottom of the yard line numbers must be 12 yards from the sideline. 
 
  
Field Markings 
	1.	The playing field will be rimmed by a solid white border six feet wide along the end lines and sidelines. There will be an additional broken yellow line nine feet farther outside this border along each sideline in the non-bench areas, and such broken line will be continued at an angle from each 25-yard line and pass behind the bench area (all benches a minimum of 30 feet back from the sidelines) at a distance of six feet. In each end zone, this broken yellow line is six feet from the solid white border. These yellow broken lines are to be eight inches wide and two feet long with a space of one foot between them.  In addition, within each bench area, a solid yellow line six feet behind the solid border will delineate a special area for coaches, behind which all players, except one player who is charting the game, must remain. Furthermore, a broken white line four inches wide and four feet long with a space of two- foot intervals will be marked three feet inside the nine-foot restriction line on the sideline, extending to meet the existing yellow broken line six feet behind both end zones and at each television box outside the bench area.  
	2.	All lines are to be four inches wide, with the exception of the goal line and yellow lines, which are to be eight inches wide. Tolerance of line widths is plus one-fourth inch.  
	3.	All line work is to be laid out to dimensions shown on the plan with a tolerance of plus one-fourth inch. All lines are straight.  
	4.	Allboundarylines,goallines,andmarkedyardlinesaretobecontinuouslines.  
	5.	The four intersections of goal lines and sidelines must be marked at inside corners of the end zone and the goal line by pylons. Pylons must be placed at inside edges of white lines and should not touch the surface of the actual playing field itself.  
	6.	All lines are to be marked with a material that is not injurious to eyes or skin.  
	7.	Nobenchesorrigidfixturesshouldbenearerthan1Oyardsfromthesidelines. If space permits, they may be further back.  
	8.	Player benches can be situated anywhere between respective 30-yard lines. Where possible, a continuation of the dotted yellow line is to extend from the 25-yard lines to a point six feet behind the player benches thereby enclosing this area.  
	9.	A white arrow is to be placed on the ground adjacent to the top portion of each number (with the exception of the 50) with the point formed by the two longer sides pointing toward the goal line. The two longer sides measure 36 inches each, while the side measures 18 inches. The 18-inch crossfield side is to start 15 inches below the top, and 6 inches from the goalward edge of each outer number (except the 50).  
10.The location of the inbounds lines is 70’9” for professional football, 60’0” for college football. On fields used primarily by the NFL, the professional inbounds lines should be 4 inches wide by 2 feet long. Alternate college lines, if they are to be included, should be 4 inches wide by 1 foot long. 
11. Care must be exercised in any end zone marking, decoration, or club identification at the 50-yard line, that said marks or decorations do not in any way cause confusion as to delineation of goal lines, sidelines, and end lines. Such markings or decorations must be approved by the Commissioner. 
Inbound Yard Markers 

Dimensions for Numerals on the Playing Field 

Dimensions for the Directional Arrows 

Priority Diamond 
4' 
     
NFL Shield at 25’s 
6' 4' 

5.15.23 
NFL BENCH AREA SHOWING RESTRICTING ZONES 
            
CHAIN CREW AND OFFICIALS ONLY 
6’ 
COACHES AND SITUATION SUBSTITUTION PLAYERS ONLY 
PLAYERS AND BENCH PERSONNEL 
BENCH BENCH BENCH 
MEDIA AND ALL OTHERS 
6’ 3’ 
   
21’ 7” 
    
 
111’ 9.5” 
15’ 
6’ 
 
150’ 
6.7.22 
Rule 
Page 
ORDER OF THE RULES 
	.	1  The Field 1  
	.	2  The Ball 2  
	.	3  Definitions 3  
	.	4  Game Timing 11  
	.	5  Players, Substitutes, Equipment, General Rules 16  
	.	6  Free Kicks 22  
	.	7  Ball in Play, Dead Ball, Scrimmage 25  
	.	8  Forward Pass, Backward Pass, Fumble 29  
	.	9  Scrimmage Kick 35  
	.	10  Opportunity to Catch a Kick, Fair Catch 39  
	.	11  Scoring 41  
	.	12  Player Conduct 44  
	.	13  Non-Player Conduct 52  
	.	14  Penalty Enforcement 53  
	.	15  Instant Replay 59  
	.	16  Overtime Procedures 64  
	.	17  Emergencies, Unfair Acts 66  
	.	18  Guidelines for Captains 68  
	.	19  Officials 69  Penalty Summary 70 Official Signals 72 Table of Foul Codes, Team Abbreviations 78  
RULE 1 THE FIELD 
SECTION 1 DIMENSIONS 
ARTICLE 1. PLAYING LINES. The game shall be played upon a rectangular field, 360 feet in length and 160 feet in width. The lines at each end of the field are termed end lines. Those on each side are termed sidelines. Goal lines shall be established in the field 10 yards from and parallel to each end line. The area bounded by goal lines and sidelines is known as the field of play. The surface of the entire field of play must be a League-approved shade of green. The areas bounded by goal lines, end lines, and sidelines are known as the end zones. 
The areas bounded by goal lines and lines parallel to, and 70 feet 9 inches inbounds, from each sideline, are known as the side zones. The lines parallel to sidelines are termed inbound lines. The end lines and the sidelines are also termed boundary lines. 
ARTICLE 2. FIELD. 
The field includes the field of play and the end zones. The field will be rimmed by a solid white border a minimum of 6 feet wide along the end lines and sidelines. An additional broken limit line 6 feet further outside this border is to encompass the field in the non-bench areas, and such broken line will be continued at an angle from each 25-yard line and pass behind the bench areas (all benches a minimum 30 feet back from the sidelines). In addition, within each bench area, a yellow line 6 feet behind the solid white border will delineate a special area for coaches, behind which all players, except one player charting the game, must remain. If a club’s solid white border is a minimum of 12 feet wide, there is no requirement that the broken restraining line also be added in the non-bench areas. However, the appropriate yellow line described above must be clearly marked within the bench areas. 
In special circumstances (for example, an artificial surface in a multi-purpose stadium) and subject to prior approval from the League Office, a club may omit the 6-foot solid white border during the preseason or later period while football overlaps with another sport, and substitute a single 4-inch white line at what normally would be the outer limit of the solid border (6 feet from the sidelines). 
SECTION 2 MARKINGS 
ARTICLE 1. LINE MARKINGS. At intervals of 5 yards, yard lines (3-12-9) parallel to the goal lines shall be marked in the field of play. These lines are to stop 8 inches short of the 6-foot solid border. The 4-inch wide yard lines are to be extended 4 inches beyond the white 6-foot border along the sidelines. Each of these lines shall be intersected at right angles by short lines 70 feet, 9 inches long (23 yards, 1 foot, 9 inches) in from each side to indicate inbound lines. 
ARTICLE 2. INBOUND LINES. In line with the inbound lines there shall be marks at 1-yard intervals between each distance of 5 yards for the full length of the field. These lines are to begin 8 inches from the 6-foot solid border and are to measure 2 feet in length. 
Bottoms of numbers indicating yard lines in multiples of 10 must be placed beginning 12 yards in from each sideline. These are to be 2 yards in length. 
Two yards from the middle of each goal line and parallel to it, there shall be marked in the field of play, lines 1 yard in length. All boundary lines, goal lines, and marked lines are to be continuous lines. These, and any other specified markings, must be in white, and there shall be no exceptions without the authorization of the Commissioner. Field numerals must also be white. 
Care must be exercised in any end zone marking or decoration or club identification at the 50-yard line that said marking or decorations do not in any way cause confusion as to delineation of goal lines, sidelines, and end lines. Such markings or decorations must be approved by the Commissioner. 
The four intersections of goal lines and sidelines must be marked, at inside corners, by weighted pylons. In addition, two such pylons shall be placed on each end line (four in all). 
ARTICLE 3. GOAL LINE. All measurements are to be made from the inside edges of the line marking the boundary lines. Each goal line marking is to be in its end zone so that the edge of the line toward the field of play (actual goal line) is 30 feet from the inside edge of the end line. Each goal line is to be eight inches wide. 
All lines are to be marked with a material that is not injurious to eyes or skin. It is desirable that the yard line markers be flexible in order to prevent injury. No benches or rigid fixtures should be nearer than 30 feet from sidelines. 
SECTION 3 GOAL 
ARTICLE 1. CROSSBAR. In the plane of each end line, there shall be a centrally placed horizontal crossbar 18 feet, 6 inches in length, the top face of which is 10 feet above the ground. The goal is the vertical plane extending indefinitely above the crossbar and between the lines indicated by the outer edges of the goal posts. 
ARTICLE 2. GOAL POSTS. All goal posts will be the single-standard type, offset from the end line and bright gold in color. The uprights will extend 35 feet above the crossbar and will be no less than 3 inches and no more than 4 inches in diameter. An orange-colored ribbon 4 inches by 42 inches is to be attached to the top of each post. 
Note: Goal posts must be padded in a manner prescribed by the League. 
SECTION 4 CHAIN CREW AND BALL CREW 
Members of the chain crew and the ball crew must be uniformly identifiable as specified by the Commissioner. White shirts are to be worn by members of the chain crew. 
SECTION 5 SIDELINE MARKERS 
The home club must provide and use the standard set of sideline markers that have been approved by the Commissioner. 
1 
RULE 2 THE BALL 
SECTION 1 DIMENSIONS 
The ball must be a “Wilson,” hand selected, bearing the signature of the Commissioner of the League, Roger Goodell. 
The ball shall be made up of an inflated (121⁄2 to 131⁄2 pounds) urethane bladder enclosed in a pebble grained, leather case (natural tan color) without corrugations of any kind. It shall have the form of a prolate spheroid, and the size and weight shall be: long axis, 11 to 111⁄4 inches; long circumference, 28 to 281⁄2 inches; short circumference, 21 to 211⁄4 inches; weight, 14 to 15 ounces. 
The Referee shall be the sole judge as to whether all balls offered for play comply with these specifications. A League-approved inflation measurement device will be provided to the officials for every game. In addition, a pump is to be furnished by the home club. The balls shall remain under the supervision of the Referee until they are delivered to members of the ball crew just prior to the start of the game. 
SECTION 2 SUPPLY 
Each team will make 12 primary and 12 backup balls available for testing by the Referee no later than two hours and 15 minutes prior to the starting time of the game to meet League requirements. For all games, six new footballs, sealed in a special box and shipped by the manufacturer to the officiating crew, will be opened in the officials’ locker room two hours and 45 minutes prior to the starting time of the game. These balls are to be specially marked by the manufacturer and used exclusively for the kicking game. 
In the event a team ball does not conform to specifications, or its supply is exhausted, the Referee shall secure a proper ball from the opposing team and, failing that, use the best available ball. Any such circumstances must be reported to the Commissioner. 
In case of rain or a wet, muddy, or slippery field, a playable ball shall be used at the request of the offensive team’s center. The game clock shall not stop for such action (unless undue delay occurs). 
Note: It is the responsibility of the home team to furnish playable balls at all times by attendants from either side of the playing field. 
2 
RULE 3 DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 1 APPROVED RULING (A.R.) 
An Approved Ruling (A.R.) is a written decision on a given statement of facts and serves to illustrate the intent and application of a rule. Supplemental notes are used to amplify a rule. A Note is more specific and applies to a particular situation. It is also used to indicate pertinent references to other rules. 
An Official Ruling (O.R.) is a ruling made in the interim between the annual rules meetings and is official only during the current season. 
Technical Terms are such terms that have a fixed and defined meaning throughout the Playing Rules. Because of their alphabetical arrangement in Rule 3, certain ones are used prior to being defined. In such cases, they appear in bold type only the first time they are used. 
SECTION 2 THE BALL AND POSSESSION OF THE BALL 
ARTICLE 1. DEAD BALL. A dead ball is one that is not in play. The time period during which the ball is dead is between downs. This includes the interval during all timeouts, including intermission, and from the time the ball becomes dead until it is legally put in play. 
ARTICLE 2. BALL READY FOR PLAY. A dead ball is ready for play while the 40-second play clock is running when the ball is placed down by an official at the spot where the ball will next be put in play, or when the Referee signals for the 25-second play clock to start. 
ARTICLE 3. LIVE BALL. A live ball is a ball that is in play. A dead ball becomes a live ball when it is: (a) legally kicked on a free kick down (6-1-1; 6-1-3); (b) legally snapped on a scrimmage down (7-1-1; 7-6-1); or (c) legally kicked on a fair catch kick down. 
It continues in play until the down ends (3-9-1). 
ARTICLE 4. LOOSE BALL. A loose ball is a live ball that is not in player possession, i.e., any ball that has been kicked, passed, or fumbled. A loose ball is considered to be in possession of the team (offense) whose player kicked, passed, or fumbled it. It is a loose ball until a player secures possession or until the ball becomes dead. If it has not yet struck the ground, a loose ball is in flight. 
ARTICLE 5. FUMBLE. A fumble is any act, other than passing, successful handing, or legally kicking the ball, which results in a loss of player possession. It is not a fumble if the player immediately regains control of the ball. A fumble ends when a player of either team possesses the ball, or when the ball is dead. The use of the term fumble always means that the ball was in possession of a player when the act occurred (8-7-3). 
Note: An intentional fumble that causes the ball to go forward is a forward pass and may be illegal (8-1-1-Pen. a–c). ARTICLE 6. MUFF. A muff is the touching of a loose ball by a player in an unsuccessful attempt to obtain possession of it. 
Note: Any ball intentionally muffed forward is a bat and may be a foul (3-3; 12-5-1; 3-15). Touching the ball refers to any contact with the ball. There is no distinction between a player touching the ball with his hands, or 
with any other part of his body, including his hair, except as specifically provided for (9-2-2). 
	.	(a)  See 6-1-4 and 6-2-4 for touching a free kick.  
	.	(b)  See 6-2-3 for touching a free kick before it goes out of bounds between the goal lines.  
	.	(c)  See 8-1-8 for ineligible offensive player touching a forward pass on, behind, or beyond the line.  
	.	(d)  See 9-2-1, 9-3-1 for touching a scrimmage kick on or behind the line, and also 9-2-4 for being pushed into a kick by an  opponent.  
	.	(e)  See 11-4-2 for touching a kick during an attempted field goal.  
	.	(f)  Simultaneous touching by two opponents in an attempt to establish possession of a ball that has been kicked is treated as a  first touch by the kicking team.  
ARTICLE 7. PLAYER POSSESSION. 
A player is in possession when he is inbounds and has control of the ball with his hands or arms. 
To gain possession of a loose ball that has been caught, intercepted, or recovered, a player (a) must have complete control of the ball with his hands or arms and (b) have both feet or any other part of his body, other than his hands, completely on the ground inbounds, and, after (a) and (b) have been fulfilled, perform any act common to the game (e.g., tuck the ball away, extend it forward, take an additional step, turn upfield, or avoid or ward off an opponent). It is not necessary that he commit such an act, provided that he maintains control of the ball long enough to do so. This rule applies in the field of play, at the sideline, and in the end zone. 
Notes: 
(1) Movement of the ball does not automatically result in loss of control. (2) If a player who has completed the first two, but not the third requirement for possession, contacts the ground and loses 
control of the ball, there is no possession if the ball hits the ground before he regains control, or if he regains control out of bounds. If a player would have caught, intercepted, or recovered a ball inbounds, but is carried out of bounds, player possession will be granted (8-1-3-Note 5). 
The terms catch, intercept, recover, advance, and fumble denote player possession (as distinguished from touching or muffing). 
3 
A catch is made when a player inbounds secures possession of a pass, kick, or fumble that is in flight. An interception is made when an opponent who is inbounds catches a forward or backward pass or a fumble that has not touched the ground. 
Notes: 
	.	(1)  It is a catch, or an interception, if, in the process of attempting to possess the ball, a player secures control of the ball prior to it touching the ground, and that control is maintained during and after the ball has touched the ground.  
	.	(2)  In the field of play, if a catch or interception has been completed, and the ball comes loose before the player is down by contact, it is a fumble, and the ball remains alive. It is also a fumble if the action occurs in the end zone of the player who caught the loose ball. If the action occurs in the opponent’s end zone, it is a touchdown or a touchback.  
	.	(3)  If there is any question by the covering official(s) as to whether a forward pass is complete, intercepted, or incomplete, it always will be ruled incomplete.  
A recovery is made when a player inbounds secures possession of a loose ball after it has touched the ground. 
If a loose ball is controlled simultaneously by two opponents, and both players retain it, it is simultaneous possession, and the ball belongs to the team last in possession, or to the receiving team when there has been a free kick, scrimmage kick, or fair catch kick. It is not simultaneous possession if a player gains control first and an opponent subsequently gains joint control. 
SECTION 3 BAT 
A bat is the intentional striking of the ball with any part of the hand or arm. See 12-5-1. 
SECTION 4 BLOCKING 
Blocking is the act of obstructing or impeding an opponent by contacting him with a part of the blocker’s body. A block in the back is a block that is delivered from behind an opponent above his waist. It is not a block in the back: 
	.	(a)  if a player is making a personal attempt to recover a loose ball;  
	.	(b)  if the opponent turns away from the blocker when contact is imminent;  
	.	(c)  if both of the blocker’s hands are on the opponent’s side. (If either hand is on the back, it is a foul.)  
A block below the waist is when the initial contact with any part of the blocker’s body is below the waist of an opponent, other than the runner, who has one or both feet on the ground. A blocker who makes contact above the waist and then slides below the waist has not blocked below the waist. If an opponent uses his hands to ward off a block creating contact below the waist, it is not a block below the waist. 
SECTION 5 CHUCKING 
Chucking is intentionally contacting an eligible receiver who is in front of a defender. (See 12-1-5-d-exc. 1). 
SECTION 6 CLIPPING 
Clipping is blocking an opponent from behind below the waist, provided the opponent is not a runner. It is not clipping if an opponent turns his back as the block is delivered or about to be delivered. 
Notes: 
	.	(1)  It is clipping (including in close-line play) if an offensive player’s block (legal or illegal) is followed by the blocker rolling up on the side or back of the legs of the defender.  
	.	(2)  See 12-2-1 for additional interpretations or restrictions concerning clipping in close-line play.  
SECTION 7 CLOSE-LINE PLAY 
Close-line play is contact that occurs in an area extending between the outside edges of the normal tackle positions and three yards on either side of the line of scrimmage. Close-line play no longer exists after the ball leaves that area. 
SECTION 8 DISQUALIFIED PLAYER 
A disqualified player is one who is prohibited from further participation in the game. He must return to his dressing room within a reasonable period of time and is not permitted to reappear in his team uniform or return to any area other than to which spectators have access. 
SECTION 9 DOWN 
ARTICLE 1. DOWN. A down is a period of action that starts when the ball is put in play (3-2-3) and ends when the ball is declared dead (7-2-1). 
A down that starts with a snap is a scrimmage down (3-30). 
A down that starts with a free kick is a free kick down (6-1-1). 
A down that starts with a fair catch kick is a fair catch kick down (10-2-4-a; 11-4-3). 
ARTICLE 2. SERIES OF DOWNS. A series of downs is the four consecutive charged scrimmage downs allotted to the offensive team during which it must advance the ball to a yard line called “the line to gain” in order to retain possession. 
ARTICLE 3. LINE TO GAIN. The line to gain is the spot 10 yards in advance of the spot of the snap that starts a series, except when a goal line is less than 10 yards from this spot. In that case, the line to gain is the goal line. 
ARTICLE 4. CHARGED DOWN. A charged down is a scrimmage down that is not nullified by a penalty, or during which there is not a change of possession. It counts as a down in a series of downs. 
4 
ARTICLE 5. FIRST DOWN. The initial down in each series is the first down. If it is a charged down, subsequent charged downs are numbered consecutively (i.e., second down, third down, or fourth down) until a new series is declared for either team (7-3). 
SECTION 10 FAIR CATCH 
A fair catch is an unhindered catch of a scrimmage kick (provided that it has crossed the line of scrimmage), or of a free kick, that is in flight by a player of the receiving team who has legally signaled his intention of attempting such a catch (10-2-1). 
Note: For fair catch kick, see 11-4-3. 
SECTION 11 FIELD GOAL 
A field goal is made by kicking the ball from the field of play through the plane of the opponent’s goal, which is an area either between the goal posts and above the cross bar, or, if above the goal posts, between the outside edges of the goal posts. A field goal is made by a drop kick or a place kick from (a) on or behind the line on a play from scrimmage or (b) during a fair catch kick. See 11-4-3; 3-18-1-Item 1-2; and 10-2-4-a. 
SECTION 12 THE FIELD 
ARTICLE 1. BOUNDARY LINES. The boundary lines are the end lines and the sidelines and enclose the field upon which the game is played. 
ARTICLE 2. END LINES. The end lines are the lines at each end of the field and are perpendicular to the sidelines. The end line is 10 yards from the goal line and at the back of the end zone. 
ARTICLE 3. END ZONE. The end zone is the rectangle formed by the goal line, the end line, and the sidelines. The goal line and the pylons are in the end zone. 
ARTICLE 4. FIELD OF PLAY. The field of play is the rectangle formed by the goal lines and the sidelines. It does not include the end zone. 
ARTICLE 5. GOAL. The goal is the area above the crossbar between the uprights, or, if above the uprights, the area between the outside edges of the uprights. A team’s own goal is the one it is defending. The adjacent goal line is known as its goal line. 
ARTICLE 6. GOAL LINES. The goal lines are the lines between the sidelines that separate the end zone from the field of play. The goal lines are vertical planes that are parallel to and 10 yards from the end lines. 
ARTICLE 7. INBOUNDS LINES. The inbounds lines are hash marks on the field of play that are 70 feet nine inches from and parallel to each sideline. 
ARTICLE 8. SIDELINES. The sidelines are the lines on each side of the field and are perpendicular to the end lines. The sidelines separate the field of play from the area that is out of bounds. 
ARTICLE 9. YARD LINE. A yard line is any line and its vertical plane parallel to the end line. The yard lines (marked or unmarked) in the field of play are named by number in yards from a team’s goal line to the center of the field. 
Note: The yard line 19 yards from Team A’s goal line is called A’s 19-yard line. The yard line 51 yards from A’s goal line is called B’s 49-yard line. For brevity, these are referred to as A’s 19 and B’s 49 or A19 and B49. 
SECTION 13 FORWARD PROGRESS 
ARTICLE 1. FORWARD PROGRESS. The forward progress of a runner or airborne receiver is the point at which his advance toward his opponent’s goal ends and is the spot at which the ball is declared dead by rule, irrespective of the runner or receiver being pushed or carried backward by an opponent. 
ARTICLE 2. FORWARD, BEYOND, OR IN ADVANCE. Forward, beyond, or in advance of are terms that designate a point nearer the goal line of the defense. Backward or behind designate a point nearer the goal line of the offense. A pass parallel to a yard line, or an offensive player moving parallel to it at the snap, is considered backward. 
SECTION 14 FOULS AND SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION 
ARTICLE 1. TYPES OF FOULS. A foul is any infraction of a playing rule for which a penalty is prescribed. 
	.	(a)  A live ball foul is a foul that occurs during the period after the snap until the ball is dead.  
	.	(b)  A dead ball foul is a foul that occurs in the continuing action after a down ends, or a taunting foul that occurs at any time.  
	.	(c)  A foul between downs is a foul that occurs after the end of the down and after any continuing action resulting from the down,  but prior to the next snap or free kick.  
	.	(d)  A multiple foul is one of two or more fouls by the same team during the same down (14-1-3), including dead ball fouls.  
	.	(e)  A double foul is a foul by either team during the same down during which both teams commit at least one foul, including dead  ball fouls.  
ARTICLE 2. BASIC SPOT. The basic spot is a reference point for specific types of plays that is used to determine the spot of enforcement. 
ARTICLE 3. SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT. The spot of enforcement is the spot at which a penalty is enforced. Seven such spots are commonly used: 
	.	(a)  The previous spot: The spot at which the ball was last put in play.  
	.	(b)  The spot of the foul: The spot at which a foul was committed or, by rule, is considered to have been committed.  
	.	(c)  The spot of a backward pass or a fumble: The spot at which the backward pass or fumble occurred during the down in which  
there was a foul. 
5 
(d) The dead ball spot: The spot at which the ball became dead. (e) The succeeding spot: The spot at which the ball will next be put in play (i.e., the spot of the ball after enforcement for a foul, 
or, if there has been no foul, the spot at which the ball became dead). 
(f) The other Try spot. The yard line of the other Try option, as determined by any previously enforced penalties, if applicable. 
(g) The spot of a change of possession: The spot at which possession is gained by or awarded to the opponent. 
ARTICLE 4. VIOLATION. A violation is an infraction of a playing rule for which a penalty is not prescribed. A violation does not offset a foul. 
SECTION 15 HANDING THE BALL 
Handing the ball is transferring player possession from one teammate to another without passing or kicking it. 
	.	(a)  Except where permitted by rule, handing the ball forward to a teammate is illegal.  
	.	(b)  Loss of player possession by unsuccessful execution of attempted handing is a fumble charged to the player that last had  possession. A muffed handoff (legal or illegal) is a fumble, unless either player immediately regains control of the ball, and  the ball remains alive.  
	.	(c)  A forward handoff occurs when the ball is handed (regardless of the direction of the movement of the ball) to a player who is  in advance of a teammate from whose hands he takes or receives it.  
SECTION 16 HUDDLE 
A huddle is the action of two or more players in the field of play or in the end zone who, instead of assuming their normal position for the snap, free kick, or fair catch kick form a group for receiving instructions for the next play or for any other reason. 
SECTION 17 IMPETUS 
Impetus is the action of a player who carries the ball or provides the force (i.e., a pass, kick, snap, or fumble) that causes a ball in the field of play to touch or cross a goal line. If a loose ball touches or crosses a goal line, the impetus is attributed to the team whose player passed, kicked, snapped, or fumbled the ball, unless an opponent: 
	.	(a)  muffs a ball that is at rest, or nearly at rest;  
	.	(b)  bats a ball that has been kicked or fumbled;  
	.	(c)  bats a backward pass after it has struck the ground; or  
	.	(d)  illegally kicks any ball (see 12-5-2).  Note:  (1) A loose ball retains its original status (as a pass, kick, fumble, etc.) even if a new impetus is added. (2) The impetus is always attributed to the offense, unless the defense creates a new force that sends the ball behind its own goal line by muffing a ball which is at rest or nearly at rest, or by batting a loose ball on the ground or kicking any  loose ball. (3) If a passive player is pushed or blocked into any kicked or fumbled ball or into a backward pass after it has struck the  ground, causing the Loose Ball to touch a goal line or anything on or behind a goal line, the impetus is attributed to the pusher or blocker, provided that the pushed (blocked) player was not making an attempt to block an opponent.  
SECTION 18 KICKS 
ARTICLE 1. KICK. A kick is intentionally striking the ball with the knee, lower leg, or foot. A kick ends when a player of either team possesses the ball, or when the ball is dead. 
Item 1. Drop Kick. A drop kick is a kick by a player who drops the ball and kicks it as, or immediately after, it touches the ground. Item 2. Placekick. A placekick is a kick made by a player while the ball is in a fixed position on the ground. The ball may be held 
in position by a teammate. If it is a kickoff, it is permissible to use an approved manufactured tee. Item 3. Punt. A punt is a kick made by a player who drops the ball and kicks it before it strikes the ground. 
ARTICLE 2. KICKER. A kicker is the player of Team A who legally drop kicks, placekicks, or punts the ball. Team A is identified as the kickers during a down in which there is a scrimmage kick, free kick, or fair catch kick. 
ARTICLE 3. RECEIVER. A receiver is any Team B player during a down in which there is a scrimmage kick, free kick, or fair catch kick. Team B is identified as the receiving team during the entire down. 
ARTICLE 4. FAIR CATCH KICK. A fair catch kick is a drop kick or placekick without a tee from the spot of a fair catch in an attempt to score a field goal. 
ARTICLE 5. FREE KICK. A free kick is a kickoff or safety kick that puts the ball in play to start a free kick down. Item 1. Kickoff. A kickoff is a kick that puts the ball in play at the start of each half, at the start of overtime, after each try, and 
after a successful field goal. Item 2. Safety Kick. A safety kick is a kick that puts the ball in play after a safety. 
ARTICLE 6. RESTRAINING LINES. The restraining lines are lines which restrict the alignment of the kicking and receiving teams during a free kick and fair catch kick. 
ARTICLE 7. SCRIMMAGE KICK. A scrimmage kick is a punt, drop kick, or placekick from on or behind the line of scrimmage. ARTICLE 8. TEE. A tee is an approved device that is used to elevate the ball for a placekick during a kickoff. 
6 
SECTION 19 LINE OF SCRIMMAGE, NEUTRAL ZONE 
ARTICLE 1. SCRIMMAGE LINE. The line of scrimmage is the vertical plane of the yard line that passes through the forward point of the ball after it has been made ready for play. The term scrimmage line, or line, implies a play from scrimmage. 
ARTICLE 2. NEUTRAL ZONE. The neutral zone is the space between the forward and backward points of the ball (planes) and extends to the sidelines. It starts when the ball is ready for play (See neutral zone infraction, 7-4-4). 
ARTICLE 3. PLAYER ON LINE OF SCRIMMAGE. A player of Team A, who is on the line of scrimmage, must have his shoulders facing Team B’s goal line. 
Item 1. Non-Snapper. If he is not the snapper, no part of his body is permitted to be in the neutral zone at the snap, and his helmet must break a vertical plane that passes through the beltline of the snapper. 
Item 2. Snapper. If he is the snapper, no part of his body may be beyond the neutral zone. 
Item 3. Team B. A Team B player in a three-point or four-point stance is considered to be on the line of scrimmage if he is within one yard of the neutral zone. A Team B player in a two-point stance is considered to be on the line if any part of his body is breaking the vertical plane that passes through the feet of the deepest down lineman. 
ARTICLE 4. ENCROACHING. A player is encroaching (7-4-3) on the neutral zone when any part of his body is in it and he contacts an offensive player or the ball prior to the snap. 
ARTICLE 5. LOOSE BALL CROSSES LINE OF SCRIMMAGE. A loose ball has crossed the line of scrimmage when, as the result of a fumble, pass, or legal kick by a Team A player, it touches the ground or any player or official beyond the neutral zone. 
SECTION 20 OFFSIDE 
A player is offside when any part of his body or his person is in the neutral zone, or is beyond his free kick line, or fair catch kick line when the ball is put in play, unless he is a holder of a placekick for a free kick (6-1-3-b-1) or fair catch kick (11-4-3), or a kicker (6-1-3-b-2). The snapper is offside if any part of his body is beyond the neutral zone. The kicker is not offside unless his kicking foot is beyond his restraining line when the ball is kicked. 
SECTION 21 OUT OF BOUNDS, INBOUNDS, AND INBOUNDS SPOT 
ARTICLE 1. PLAYER OR OFFICIAL OUT OF BOUNDS. A player or an official is out of bounds when he touches a boundary line, or when he touches anything that is on or outside a boundary line, except a player, an official, or a pylon. 
ARTICLE 2. PLAYER INBOUNDS. A player who has been out of bounds re-establishes himself as an inbounds player when both feet, or any part of his body other than his hands, touch the ground within the boundary lines, provided that no part of his body is touching a boundary line or anything other than a player, an official, or a pylon on or outside a boundary line. 
ARTICLE 3. BALL OUT OF BOUNDS. Item 1. Ball in Player Possession. A ball that is in player possession is out of bounds when the runner is out of bounds, or when 
the ball touches a boundary line or anything that is on or outside such line, except another player or an official. 
Item 2. Loose Ball. A loose ball that is not in player control is out of bounds when it touches a boundary line or anything that is on or outside such line, including a player, an official, or a pylon. 
ARTICLE 4. OUT OF BOUNDS SPOT. Item 1. Loose Ball. If a loose ball touches anything on or outside a boundary line, the out of bounds spot is the forward point of 
the ball when the ball crosses the sideline. 
Item 2. Runner Out of Bounds. If the ball is in player possession when that player goes out of bounds, the out of bounds spot is the forward point of the ball when the ball crosses the sideline, or, if the ball does not cross the sideline, the forward point of the ball at the instant the player is out of bounds. 
Item 3. Runner Inbounds. If the ball, while in possession of a player who is inbounds, is declared out of bounds because of touching anything that is out of bounds, the out of bounds spot is the yard line through the forward point of the ball at the instant of such touching. 
ARTICLE 5. INBOUNDS SPOT. The inbounds spot is a spot on the Inbounds Line (the hash marks) that passes through the spot where the ball went out of bounds between the goal lines. 
SECTION 22 PASS 
ARTICLE 1. PASS. A pass is the movement caused by a player intentionally handing, throwing, shoveling (shovel pass), or pushing (push pass) the ball (3-25-2). Such a movement is a pass even if the ball does not leave his hand or hands, provided a teammate takes it (hand-to-hand pass). 
ARTICLE 2. PASSER AND PASSING TEAM. A player who makes a legal forward pass is known as the passer until the play ends. The teammates of any player who passes the ball forward (legally or illegally) are known collectively as the passing team or passers. 
ARTICLE 3. PASS PLAY. A pass play begins with the snap and ends when a forward pass thrown from behind the line of scrimmage is caught by a player of either team or is incomplete. After the pass is caught, a running play begins. 
ARTICLE 4. FORWARD PASS. It is a forward pass if: (a) the ball initially moves forward (to a point nearer the opponent’s goal line) after leaving the passer’s hand(s); 
7 
	.	(b)  the ball first touches the ground, a player, an official, or anything else at a point that is nearer the opponent’s goal line than the point at which the ball leaves the passer’s hand(s); or  
	.	(c)  when a Team A player is holding the ball to pass it forward, any intentional movement forward of his hand starts a forward pass.  
Item 1. Contact by Team B Player. If contact by an opponent materially affects a passer after the passer begins his throwing motion, it is a forward pass if he passes the ball, regardless of where the ball strikes the ground, a player, an official, or anything else. When this occurs, intentional grounding rules do not apply. 
When a passer is contacted by an opponent before beginning his throwing motion, the direction of the pass is the responsibility of the passer, and intentional grounding rules apply. 
Item 2. Passer Tucks Ball. If the player loses possession of the ball during an attempt to bring it back toward his body, or if the player loses possession after he has tucked the ball into his body, it is a fumble. 
Item 3. Passer re-cocks his arm. If the player loses possession of the ball while attempting to re-cock his arm, it is a fumble. Item 4. Fumbled or Muffed Ball Goes Forward. The fact that a fumbled or muffed ball goes forward is disregarded, unless the 
act is ruled intentional. If it is intentional, a fumbled ball that goes forward is a forward pass (8-1-1), and a muff is a bat (12-5-1). 
ARTICLE 5. BACKWARD PASS. It is a backward pass if the yard line at which the ball is first touched by a player or the ground is parallel to or behind the yard line at which the ball leaves the passer’s hand. A snap becomes a backward pass when the snapper releases the ball. 
Note: If a pass is batted, muffed, punched, or kicked in any direction, its original designation as a forward pass or a backward pass does not change. 
SECTION 23 PENALTY 
ARTICLE 1. PENALTY. A penalty is imposed upon a team that has committed a foul and may result in loss of down, loss of yardage, an automatic first down, a charged timeout, a loss of playing time, withdrawal or disqualification of a player, extension of a period, the award of a score, or a combination of the preceding. 
ARTICLE 2. LOSS OF DOWN. The phrase loss of down indicates that a team committing a foul will not have the opportunity to repeat the down after enforcement of any yardage penalty. 
SECTION 24 PLAYER 
A player is a participant of either team who is in the game. 
SECTION 25 PLAYS 
ARTICLE 1. FREE KICK PLAY. A free kick play begins with a legal or illegal free kick and ends when a player of either team establishes possession of the ball, or when the ball is dead by rule. A running play begins when a player of Team B establishes possession. 
ARTICLE 2. PASSING PLAY. A pass play begins with the snap and ends when a forward pass thrown from behind the line of scrimmage is caught by a player of either team or is incomplete. At the instant that a pass is caught, a running play begins. 
ARTICLE 3. RUNNING PLAY. A running play begins in the following situations: 
	.	(a)  If there is not a subsequent kick or legal or illegal forward pass from behind the line of scrimmage, a running play begins with  the snap.  
	.	(b)  If there is a legal or illegal forward pass thrown from behind the line of scrimmage, a running play begins when the forward  pass is caught by a player of either team.  
	.	(c)  If there is a running play followed by an illegal forward pass thrown from beyond the line of scrimmage, or by an illegal forward  pass not from scrimmage, a new running play begins when the pass is caught by a player of either team.  
	.	(d)  If there is a free kick, a running play begins when Team B establishes possession of the ball.  
	.	(e)  If there is a scrimmage kick, a running play begins when Team B establishes possession of the ball, or when Team A  establishes possession of a kicked ball behind the line of scrimmage.  
	.	(f)  If there is a running play followed by a fumble or a backward pass, a new running play begins when a player of either team  establishes possession of the ball.  
A running play ends: (a) When the ball is declared dead; (b) When a runner loses or relinquishes possession by a fumble or a backward pass; or (c) When a player of either team throws an illegal forward pass beyond the line of scrimmage or when there is not a line of 
scrimmage. 
Note: The running play includes the loose ball action before a player gains or regains possession or the ball is declared dead. ARTICLE 4. SCRIMMAGE KICK PLAY. A scrimmage kick play begins with the snap. It ends when a player of either team 
establishes possession of a kicked ball, or when the ball is dead by rule. 
ARTICLE 5. FAIR CATCH KICK PLAY. A fair catch kick play begins when the ball is kicked. It ends when a player of either team establishes possession of the ball, or when the ball is dead by rule. 
ARTICLE 6. COMBINATIONS OF PLAYS. There may be a combination of a running play and a passing play, free kick play, scrimmage kick play, or fair catch kick play during the same down, and there may be more than one running play or scrimmage kick play during the same down. 
8 
SECTION 26 POCKET AREA 
The pocket area is the area between the outside edges of the normal tackle positions on each side of the center extending backward to the offensive team’s end line. After the ball leaves the pocket area, this area no longer exists. 
SECTION 27 POST-POSSESSION FOUL 
A foul by the receiving team is a post-possession foul if it occurs during a scrimmage kick that crosses the line of scrimmage, provided that the receiving team does not lose possession during the rest of the down. See 9-5-1-Exc. 4. 
SECTION 28 RUNNER 
A runner is the offensive player who is in possession of a live ball (3-2-7), i.e., holding the ball or carrying it in any direction. 
Note: The statement that a player may advance means that he may become a runner, make a legal kick (9-1-1), make a backward pass (8-7-1), or throw a forward pass (8-1-1) from behind the line of scrimmage. 
SECTION 29 SAFETY 
It is a safety, if the ball is dead in possession of a team on or behind its own goal line when the impetus (3-17) comes from the team defending that goal line. If the offense commits a foul behind its own goal line, it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot. 
SECTION 30 SCRIMMAGE DOWN, FROM SCRIMMAGE, NOT FROM SCRIMMAGE 
A scrimmage down is one that starts with a snap (3-32). From scrimmage refers to any action from the start of the snap until the down ends or until Team B secures possession. Any action that occurs during the down after a change of team possession is not from scrimmage. 
SECTION 31 SHIFT 
A shift is any simultaneous change of position or stance by two or more offensive players before the snap after the ball has been made ready for play for a scrimmage down, including movement to the line of scrimmage by the offensive team prior to the snap (7-4-8). 
SECTION 32 SNAP AND THE SNAPPER 
A snap is a backward pass that puts the ball in play to start a scrimmage down, either by handing it or passing it backward from its position on the ground. The snapper is the offensive player who initiates this action. See 7-6 for conditions pertaining to a legal snap. 
SECTION 33 SUSPENDED PLAYER 
A suspended player is one who must be withdrawn, in accordance with Rule 5, for correction of illegal equipment (5-4). 
SECTION 34 TIGHT END BOX 
The tight end box is a rectangle that is enclosed by imaginary lines two yards outside the normal tackle positions and five yards on either side of the line of scrimmage. The tight end box continues to exist after the ball leaves the area. 
SECTION 35 TACKLING 
Tackling is an attempt by a defensive player to hold a runner to halt his advance or bring him to the ground. 
SECTION 36 TEAM A AND B, OFFENSE AND DEFENSE 
ARTICLE 1. OFFENSE AND DEFENSE. Whenever a team is in possession (3-2-7) of the ball, it is the offense, and its opponent is the defense. The team that is the offense becomes the defense, and vice versa, when there is a change of possession during the down. 
ARTICLE 2. TEAM A AND TEAM B. The team that puts the ball in play is Team A, and its opponent is Team B. They remain Team A and Team B until a down ends, even though there may be one or more changes of possession during the down. Team A is always the offense when a down starts, but becomes the defense if Team B secures possession during the down. A player of Team A is referred to as A1 and his teammates as A2, A3, etc. The opponents are B1, B2, etc. 
ARTICLE 3. CHANGE OF POSSESSION. A change of possession occurs when a player of the defensive team secures possession of a ball that has been kicked, passed, or fumbled by a player of the offensive team, or when the ball is awarded to the opposing team by rule. A change of possession includes, but is not limited to: 
	.	(a)  An interception of a forward pass;  
	.	(b)  A catch or recovery of a fumble or backward pass;  
	.	(c)  A catch or recovery of a scrimmage kick, free kick, or fair catch kick;  
	.	(d)  When the offensive team fails to reach the line to gain on fourth down; or  
	.	(e)  When the offensive team misses a field goal attempt.  
SECTION 37 TIMEOUT OR TIME IN 
ARTICLE 1. TIMEOUT. A timeout is any interval during which the game clock is stopped (4-4) and includes the intermission (4- 1-2 and 4-1-3). 
9 
During any timeout, including an intermission, all playing rules continue in effect. Representatives of either team are prohibited from entering the field, unless they are incoming substitutes, or team attendants or trainers entering to provide for the welfare of a player, and any game-type activities are prohibited on the field of play. The head coach may enter the field to check on the welfare of a player who is injured, but no assistant coach may enter the field. 
ARTICLE 2. CHARGED TEAM TIMEOUT. A charged team timeout is an interval during which the game clock is stopped and play is suspended at the request of one of the teams or when it is charged to one of the teams by rule. A timeout may be granted only when the ball is dead. 
ARTICLE 3. TIME IN. Time In is any interval during which the game clock is running (4-3). 
SECTION 38 TOUCHBACK 
It is a touchback if the ball is dead on or behind the goal line a team is defending, provided that the impetus comes from an opponent, and that it is not a touchdown or an incomplete pass. 
SECTION 39 TOUCHDOWN 
It is a touchdown if any part of the ball is on, above, or behind the opponent’s goal line while legally in possession of an inbounds player, provided it is not a touchback. 
SECTION 40 TRIPPING 
Tripping is the use of the leg or foot to obstruct any opponent (including a runner) (12-2-14). 
SECTION 41 TRY 
A Try is the attempt by a team that has scored a touchdown to add one point (by a field goal) or two points (by a touchdown) during one untimed scrimmage down (11-3). 
SECTION 42 TWO-MINUTE WARNING 
The two-minute warning is an automatic timeout that occurs at the conclusion of the last down for which the ball is legally snapped or kicked prior to two minutes remaining on the game clock in the second and fourth periods. 
SECTION 43 T-FORMATION QUARTERBACK 
A “T-Formation Quarterback” is defined as a player aligned one yard or less behind the snapper. 
10 
RULE 4 GAME TIMING 
SECTION 1 PERIODS, INTERMISSIONS, HALFTIME 
ARTICLE 1. LENGTH OF GAME. The length of the game is 60 minutes, divided into four periods of 15 minutes each. In the event the score is tied at the end of four periods, the game is extended by an overtime period (or periods) as prescribed in Rule 16. 
ARTICLE 2. INTERMISSIONS. There will be intervals of at least two minutes between the first and second periods (first half) and between the third and fourth periods (second half). During these intermissions all playing rules continue in force, and no representative of either team shall enter the field unless he is an incoming substitute, or a team attendant or trainer, entering to see to the welfare of a player. The head coach may enter the field to check on the welfare of a player who is injured, but no assistant coach may enter the field. 
Penalty: For illegally entering the field: Loss of 15 yards from the succeeding spot (13-1-6-Pen.). 
The Back Judge times the two-minute intermissions and shall signal visibly (and sound the whistle if necessary) after one minute and 50 seconds. The Referee shall sound the whistle immediately thereafter for play to start and for the play clock operator to start the 25-second clock. See 4-6-2. 
ARTICLE 3. HALFTIME. Between the second and third periods, there shall be an intermission of 13 minutes. During this intermission, play is suspended, and teams may leave the field. The Back Judge will time halftime. See 13-1-1 for fouls by non- players between halves. 
ARTICLE 4. OFFICIAL TIME. The stadium electric clock shall be the official time. The game clock operator shall start and stop the clock upon the signal of any official in accordance with the rules. The Side Judge shall supervise the timing of the game, and in case the stadium clock becomes inoperative, or if it is not being operated correctly, the Side Judge shall take over official timing on the field. Game officials can correct the game clock only before the next legal snap or kick, including an untimed down or Try. 
SECTION 2 STARTING A PERIOD OR HALF 
ARTICLE 1. KICKOFF ON SCHEDULE. Both teams must be on the field to kick off at the scheduled time for the start of each half. Prior to the start of the game, both teams are required to appear on the field at least 10 minutes prior to the scheduled kickoff to ensure sufficient time for proper warm-up. Designated members of the officiating crew must notify both head coaches personally of the scheduled time for kickoff prior to the start of each half. 
Penalties: (a) For delaying the start of a half: Loss of 15 yards from the spot of the kickoff as determined by 6-1-2-a. (b) For failure to appear on the field at least 10 minutes prior to the scheduled kickoff of the first half: Loss of the coin- 
toss option for both halves and overtime, and loss of 15 yards from the spot of the kickoff for the first half. 
ARTICLE 2. TOSS OF COIN. Not more than three minutes before the kickoff of the first half, the Referee, in the presence of both team’s captains (limit of six per team, active, inactive or honorary) shall toss a coin at the center of the field. Prior to the Referee’s toss, the call of “heads” or “tails” must be made by the captain of the visiting team, or by the captain designated by the Referee if there is no home team. Unless the winner of the toss defers his choice to the second half, he must choose one of two privileges, and the loser is given the other. The two privileges are: 
(a) The opportunity to receive the kickoff, or to kick off; or (b) The choice of goal his team will defend. 
If the coin does not turn over in the air or the toss is compromised in any way, the Referee shall toss it again. The captain’s original call may not be changed. 
Penalty: For failure to comply: Loss of coin-toss option for both halves and overtime, and loss of 15 yards from the spot of the kickoff for the first half. 
For the second half, the captain who lost the pregame toss is to have the first choice of the two privileges listed in (a) or (b), unless one of the teams lost its first and second half options, or unless the winner of the pregame toss deferred his choice to the second half, in which case he must choose (a) or (b) above. Immediately prior to the start of the second half, the captains of both teams must inform the Referee of their respective choices. 
A captain’s first choice from any alternative privileges listed above is final and not subject to change. 
ARTICLE 3. CHANGE OF GOALS. At the end of the first and third periods, the teams must change goals. Team possession, the number of the succeeding down, the relative position of the ball on the field of play, and the line to gain remain the same. 
SECTION 3 STARTING THE GAME CLOCK 
ARTICLE 1. FREE KICK DOWN. The game clock operator shall start the game clock (time in) after a free kick when the ball is legally touched in the field of play. The game clock shall not start if: (a) the receiving team touches or recovers the ball in the end zone and does not carry the ball into the field of play; (b) the kicking team recovers the ball in the field of play (prior to any other legal touching); or 
(c) the receiving team signals for and makes a fair catch. 
ARTICLE 2. SCRIMMAGE DOWN. Following any timeout (3-37-1), the game clock shall be started on a scrimmage down when the ball is next snapped, except in the following situations: (a) Whenever a runner goes out of bounds on a play from scrimmage, the game clock is started when an official spots the ball 
at the inbounds spot, and the Referee gives the signal to start the game clock, except that the clock will start on the snap: 
11 
(1) after a change of possession; (2) after the two-minute warning of the first half; or (3) inside the last five minutes of the second half. 
	.	(b)  If there is an injury timeout prior to the two-minute warning, the game clock is started as if the injury timeout had not occurred.  
	.	(c)  If there is an excess team timeout after the two-minute warning, the game clock is started as if the excess timeout had not occurred.  
	.	(d)  If there is a Referee’s timeout, the game clock is started as if the Referee’s timeout had not occurred.  
	.	(e)  If the game clock is stopped before or after a down for a foul by either team, following enforcement or declination of a  penalty, the game clock will start as if the foul had not occurred, except that the clock will start on the snap if: 
	.	(1)  the foul occurs after the two-minute warning of the first half;  
	.	(2)  the foul occurs inside the last five minutes of the second half;  
	.	(3)  The offense commits a foul during the fourth period or overtime after the ball has been made ready for play, causing  the clock to stop before a snap;  
	.	(4)  the offense commits two successive delay of game penalties during the same down while time is in (see 12-3-1-n); or  
	.	(5)  a specific rule prescribes otherwise.  
	.	(f)  If a fumble or backward pass by any player goes out of bounds, the game clock starts on the Referee’s signal that a ball has been returned to the field of play.  
	.	(g)  When there is a 10-second runoff, the game clock starts when the Referee signals that the ball is ready for play.  
	.	(h)  During the Try, which is an untimed down.  
	.	(i)  When a specific rule prescribes otherwise.  
ARTICLE 3. FAIR CATCH KICK DOWN. The game clock operator shall start the game clock for a fair catch kick down when the ball is kicked. 
SECTION 4 STOPPING THE GAME CLOCK 
The game clock operator shall stop the game clock (timeout) upon a signal by any official or upon the operator’s own positive knowledge: (a) at the end of a down in which there is a free kick or fair catch kick; (b) when the kicking team recovers a scrimmage kick beyond the line of scrimmage; 
(c) when the ball is out of bounds; (d) when the ball is dead on or behind a goal line; (e) at the end of a down during which a foul occurs; (f) when a forward pass is incomplete; (g) at the time of a foul for which the ball remains dead or is dead immediately; (h) when the Referee signals the two-minute warning for a half; (i) when a down is completed during which or after there is a change of possession; or (j) when any official signals a timeout for any other reason. 
SECTION 5 TIMEOUTS 
ARTICLE 1. CHARGED TEAM TIMEOUTS. The Referee shall suspend play while the ball is dead and declare a charged team timeout upon the request for a timeout by the head coach or any player (not a substitute) to any official. If an assistant coach signals for a timeout and it is inadvertently granted, the timeout will stand. 
Item 1. Three Timeouts Allowed. A team is allowed three charged team timeouts during each half. The Referee or another game official will notify the head coach when he has exhausted his three charged team timeouts in a half. 
Item 2. Length of Timeouts. Charged team timeouts shall be two minutes in length, unless the timeout is not used by television for a commercial break. Timeouts shall be 30 seconds in length when the designated number of television commercials have been exhausted in a quarter, if it is a second charged team timeout in the same dead ball period, or when the Referee so indicates. 
Item 3. Consecutive Team Timeouts. Each team may be granted a charged team timeout during the same dead ball period, but a second charged team timeout by either team during the same dead ball period is prohibited, and such requests shall be ignored. Such team timeouts may follow a Referee’s timeout or any automatic timeouts. 
Penalty: For when a team is inadvertently granted a second timeout during the same dead ball period, or a timeout after exhausting its three timeouts during a half: Loss of five yards and the timeout is charged. 
If the timeout is by the offense while time is in after the two-minute warning, a 10-second runoff option is available. If the timeout is by the defense while time is in, the play clock is reset to 40 seconds. If time is in, the game clock will start with the ready for play signal. 
Item 4. Unsportsmanlike Conduct. An attempt to call an excess team timeout, or to call a second timeout in the same dead ball period, by Team B in an attempt to “freeze” a kicker, shall be ignored and is unsportsmanlike conduct even if inadvertently granted (See 12-3-1-v). The timeout will be charged if inadvertently granted. This will apply to field goal or Try attempts. 
ARTICLE 2. INJURY TIMEOUTS. If an official determines a player to be injured, or if attendants from the bench come on the field to assist an injured player, an injury timeout will be called by the Referee. If the ATC Spotter identifies a player for medical attention, the rules pertaining to Injury Timeouts in Article 3 and Article 4 (c) apply. 
12 
ARTICLE 3. INJURY TIMEOUTS PRIOR TO TWO-MINUTE WARNING OF EITHER HALF. When an injury timeout is called, the injured player must leave the game for the completion of one down. The player will be permitted to remain in the game if: (a) either team calls a charged team timeout; (b) the injury is the result of a foul by an opponent; or 
(c) the period ends or the two-minute warning occurs before the next snap. 
At the conclusion of an injury timeout, the game clock will start as if the injury timeout had not occurred. If either team takes, or is charged with, a timeout, the clock will start on the snap. 
ARTICLE 4. INJURY TIMEOUTS AFTER TWO-MINUTE WARNING OF EITHER HALF. After the two-minute warning of a half, the following shall apply: 
	.	(a)  If a team has not used its three charged team timeouts, the team of the injured player will be charged a team timeout,  unless: (1) the injury is the result of a foul by an opponent; or (2) the injury occurs during a down in which there is a change of possession, a touchdown, a safety, a successful field  goal, or an attempted Try.  
	.	(b)  If a team has used its three charged team timeouts, an excess team timeout shall be called by the Referee, unless: (1) the injury is the result of a foul by an opponent; or (2) the injury occurs during a down in which there is a change of possession, a touchdown, a safety, a successful field  goal, or an attempted Try.  
	.	(c)  The player must leave the game for the completion of one down, unless: (1) the injury is the result of a foul by an opponent; or (2) either team calls or is charged a team timeout other than an excess timeout.  
Penalty: For the second and each subsequent excess team timeout after the two-minute warning: Loss of five yards from the succeeding spot for delay of the game. 
Notes: 
	.	(1)  No yardage penalty will be assessed for the first excess team timeout, but a 10-second runoff of the game clock may be applicable pursuant to Note 3 below. At the conclusion of an excess timeout taken while time is in, the game clock shall start with the ready for play signal. For any excess timeout charged to the defense, the play clock is reset to 40 seconds.  
	.	(2)  If the Referee has already called an excess team timeout in that half for a team, any subsequent excess timeout for that team will result in a five-yard penalty, and a 10-second runoff of the game clock may be applicable pursuant to Note 3 below. (Such penalty shall be considered a foul between downs and will not offset a foul or be part of a multiple foul).  
	.	(3)  If an excess team timeout is charged against a team in possession of the ball, and the timeout causes the clock to stop or delays the clock from starting on the ready for play signal, the ball shall not be put in play until the time on the game clock has been reduced by 10 seconds, if the defense so chooses.  
	.	(4)  Either half can end as the result of the 10-second runoff referenced above.  
	.	(5)  If an injury timeout is called for both teams during or after a down, charged team timeouts and/or excess team timeouts  are charged as appropriate, but no yardage or 10-second runoff penalties shall be enforced.  
	.	(6)  If a foul by either team occurs during a down in which there is also an injury, such foul does not affect the charging of an excess timeout, but it does prevent a 10-second runoff that may result from the excess timeout, because the foul  stopped the clock.  
	.	(7)  The Competition Committee deprecates feigning injuries, with subsequent withdrawal, to obtain a timeout without  penalty. Coaches are urged to cooperate in discouraging this practice.  
	.	(8)  There can never be a 10-second runoff against the defensive team.  
ARTICLE 5. REFEREE’S TIMEOUT. Provided that calling timeout is not in conflict with another rule, the Referee may suspend play and stop the clock (Referee’s timeout) at any time without penalty to either team when playing time is being consumed because of an unintentional delay. Such situations include, but are not limited to: (a) when there is the possibility of a measurement for a first down, or if the Referee is consulting with a captain about one; 
(b) when there is an undue pileup on the runner, or while determining possession after a fumble while time is in; (c) when there is an undue delay by officials in spotting the ball for the next snap; (d) if the snap is made before the officials can assume their positions (See 4-6-5-b if it is a repeated act); (e) when there is an injury to an official or member of the chain crew; 
(f) during an officials’ conference; or (g) while repairing or replacing game equipment, except player equipment. 
After a Referee’s timeout, the time remaining on the play clock shall be the same as when it was stopped. The play and the game clock will start as if the Referee’s timeout had not occurred. 
SECTION 6 DELAY OF GAME 
ARTICLE 1. 40-SECOND PLAY CLOCK. It is a delay of the game if the ball is not put in play by a snap within 40 seconds after the start of the play clock. The play clock operator shall time the interval between plays upon signals from game officials. The 40-second interval starts when a play ends, unless Article 2 below applies. 
13 
ARTICLE 2. 25-SECOND PLAY CLOCK. In the event of certain administrative stoppages or other delays, a team will have 25 seconds, beginning with the Referee’s whistle, to put the ball in play next by a snap or a kick. Such stoppages include, but are not limited to: (a) a change of possession; 
(b) a charged team timeout; (c) the two-minute warning; (d) the expiration of a period; (e) a penalty enforcement; (f) a Try; 
(g) a free kick after a television timeout; (h) a free kick without a television timeout. Following a Try or successful field goal attempt, teams will have 40 seconds to align 
prior to the Referee’s whistle; or (i) replay administration pursuant to Rule 15, Section 3, Article 9, if the play clock is under 25 seconds. 
A 25-second interval will be used in these situations, even if the 40-second clock is already counting down. 
ARTICLE 3. INTERRUPTION OF PLAY CLOCK. If the play clock is stopped prior to the snap for any reason, after the stoppage has concluded, the time remaining on the play clock shall be the same as when it stopped, unless: (a) the stoppage has been for a charged team timeout, the two-minute warning, the expiration of a period, or a penalty 
enforcement, in which case the play clock shall be reset to 25 seconds; 
	.	(b)  the stoppage has been for an Instant Replay review that results in a reversal, in which case the play clock shall be reset to  40 seconds, unless another rule requires otherwise;  
	.	(c)  the stoppage has been for an excess timeout while time is in that is charged to the defense, in which case the play clock  shall be reset to 40 seconds; or  
	.	(d)  fewer than 10 seconds remain on the play clock, in which case it shall be reset to 10 seconds, or the exact time on the play  clock at the discretion of the Referee.  
ARTICLE 4. BALL REMAINS DEAD. If the ball is not put in play within the applicable period, the Back Judge shall blow his whistle for the foul, and the ball remains dead. See 14-4-1-Item 1. 
ARTICLE 5. OTHER DELAY OF GAME FOULS. Other examples of action or inaction that are to be construed as delay of the game include, but are not limited to: (a) a player unnecessarily remains on a dead ball or on a runner who has been downed; (b) the snapper repeatedly snaps the ball after the neutral zone is established and before all the officials have had a 
reasonable time to assume their positions (see 7-6-3-c); (c) undue delay by either team in assembling after a timeout; (d) a defensive player aligned in a stationary position within one yard of the line of scrimmage makes quick and abrupt actions 
that are not a part of normal defensive player movement and are an obvious attempt to cause an offensive player(s) to foul (false start). The officials shall blow their whistles immediately. If the defender is walking or running toward the line of scrimmage in an effort to time the snap, but stops abruptly because the snap is not made, it is not a foul for delay of game; 
(e) spiking or throwing the ball in the field of play after a down has ended, except after a score; (f) intentional contact with the football to delay the snap or the officials’ ability to make the ball ready for play; or (g) when a timeout is erroneously granted. See 4-5-1 for enforcement. 
Penalty: For delay of the game: Loss of five yards: (a) from the succeeding spot if it occurs between downs. The ball remains dead; or (b) from the previous spot if the ball was in play. 
SECTION 7 ACTIONS TO CONSERVE TIME 
ARTICLE 1. ILLEGAL ACTS. A team is not permitted to conserve time after the two-minute warning of either half by committing any of these acts: (a) a foul by either team that prevents the snap (i.e., false start, encroachment, etc.); (b) intentional grounding; 
(c) an illegal forward pass; (d) throwing a backward pass out of bounds; (e) spiking or throwing the ball in the field of play after a down has ended, except after a touchdown; or (f) any intentional foul that causes the clock to stop. 
Penalty: For illegally conserving time: Loss of five yards unless a larger distance penalty is applicable. 
When actions referred to above are committed by the offensive team while time is in, officials will run off 10 seconds from the game clock before permitting the ball to be put in play on the ready for play signal. The game clock will start on the ready for play signal unless another rule prescribes otherwise. If the offensive team has timeouts remaining, it will have the option of using a timeout in lieu of a 10-second runoff, in which case the game clock will start on the snap after the timeout. The defense always has the option to decline the 10-second runoff and have the yardage penalty enforced, but if the yardage penalty is declined, the 10-second runoff is also declined. 
If the action is by the defense, the play clock will be reset to 40 seconds, and the game clock will start on the ready signal, unless the offense chooses to have the clock start on the snap. If the defense has timeouts remaining, it will have the option of using a timeout in lieu of the game clock being started. 
14 
ARTICLE 2. SUBSTITUTION VIOLATION AFTER TWO-MINUTE WARNING. After the two-minute warning of either half, if there is a violation of the substitution rule while the ball is dead and time is in, in addition to the applicable yardage penalty for illegal substitution, there will be a 10-second runoff pursuant to Article 1 above, unless it is obvious that the offensive team is not attempting to conserve time. 
Penalty: For illegal substitution: Loss of five yards (unless a larger distance penalty is applicable) and a 10-second runoff. 
ARTICLE 3. DEFENSIVE FOULS DURING LAST 40 SECONDS. In the last 40 seconds of either half, if there is a defensive foul prior to the snap while time is in, the half will end, unless the defense has timeouts remaining, or the offense chooses to have the game clock start on the snap. 
ARTICLE 4. REPLAY REVIEW AFTER TWO-MINUTE WARNING OF EITHER HALF. If a replay review after the two-minute warning of either half results in the on-field ruling being reversed and the correct ruling would not have stopped the game clock, or would have otherwise restarted the game clock before the next snap, the officials will run 10 seconds off the game clock and reset the play clock to 30 seconds before permitting the ball to be put in play on the ready for play signal. Neither team can decline the runoff, but either team can use a remaining timeout to prevent it. 
SECTION 8 EXTENSION OF A PERIOD OR A HALF 
ARTICLE 1. BALL IN PLAY. If time expires at the end of any period while the ball is in play, the period continues until the down ends. 
ARTICLE 2. PERIOD EXTENDED. A period may be extended for one untimed down, if any of the following occurs during a down during which time in the period expires, or during which the period had been extended pursuant to this Article: 
	.	(a)  If there is a live ball foul by the defensive team that is accepted, the offensive team may choose to extend the period by an  untimed down after enforcement of the penalty. If the first or third period is not so extended, any accepted penalty is  enforced before the start of the succeeding period.  
	.	(b)  If there is a foul by the offense, there shall be no extension of the period. If the foul occurs on the last play of the half, a  score by the offense is not counted. However, the period may be extended for an untimed down, upon the request of the defense, if the offensive team’s foul or violation is for: 
	.	(1)  illegal touching or first touching of a kick;  
	.	(2)  fair catch interference;  
	.	(3)  a palpably unfair act;  
	.	(4)  a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul committed during a down prior to a safety, an interception of a forward  pass, the recovery of a backward pass or fumble, or the offensive team failing to reach the line to gain on fourth down;  or  
	.	(5)  a foul by the kicking team prior to a player of the receiving team securing possession of the ball during a down in which  there is a safety kick, a scrimmage kick, or a free kick.  
	.	(c)  If a touchdown is made on the last play of a period, the Try attempt shall be made (except during a sudden-death period, or  if a touchdown is scored during a down in which time in the fourth period expires, and a successful Try would not affect the  outcome of the game).  
	.	(d)  If no fair catch signal is given and the kickers interfere with the receiver’s opportunity to catch a kick, the receiving team  may extend the period by a down from scrimmage.  
	.	(e)  If a fair catch is signaled and made, the receivers may choose to extend the period by a fair catch kick down (10-2-4-a). If  the first or third period is not so extended, the receivers may start the succeeding period by either a down from scrimmage  or fair catch kick (11-4-3).  
	.	(f)  If a fair catch is signaled and the kickers interfere with a receiver’s opportunity to catch a kick, the receiving team may  extend the period by either a down from scrimmage or a fair catch kick (10-2-4-a).  
	.	(g)  If a safety results from a foul during the last play of a half, the score counts. A safety kick is made if requested by the  receivers.  
	.	(h)  If a double foul occurs during the last down of either half, the period shall be extended by an untimed down.  Exceptions: The half is not extended if: (1) both fouls are dead ball fouls; (2) there is a major-minor double foul (“5 vs. 15”), and the major foul is by the offense, or if the major foul is a dead ball foul  by either team; (3) The only foul by the defense is a dead ball foul (“clean hands end of half,” see 14-4-9-Item 3); or (4) there is a double foul with a change of possession (“clean hands” rule, see 14--5--2) that does not involve a replay of  the down. If a double foul occurs on the last play of the first or third periods, the period is not extended.  
If the first or third period is extended for any reason, or if a touchdown occurs during the last play of such a period, any additional play, including a Try attempt, shall be completed before the teams change goals. 
There may be more than one untimed down at the end of a period pursuant to this Article. 
15 
RULE 5 PLAYERS, SUBSTITUTES, EQUIPMENT, GENERAL RULES 
SECTION 1 PLAYERS 
ARTICLE 1. NUMBER OF PLAYERS. The game is played by two teams of 11 players each. 
If Team A has more than 11 players in its formation for more than three seconds, or if Team B has more than 11 players in its formation and the snap is imminent, it is a foul. Once the ball is made ready for play, if either team has more than 11 players in its formation prior to a free kick, it is also a foul. In these instances, game officials shall blow their whistles immediately and not allow the snap or kick to occur. 
Penalty: For more than 11 players in the formation prior to the snap or free kick: Loss of five yards from the succeeding spot. 
If a team has more than 11 players on the field of play or the end zone when a snap, free kick, or fair catch kick is made, the ball is in play, and it is a foul. 
Penalty: For more than 11 players on the field of play or the end zone while the ball is in play: Loss of five yards from the previous spot. 
ARTICLE 2. PLAYERS NUMBERED BY POSITION. All players must wear numerals on their jerseys in accordance with Rule 5, Section 4, Article 3, Item 3. Such numerals must be by playing position, as follows: 
	.	(a)  quarterbacks: 0-19;  
	.	(b)  punters and placekickers: 0-49 and 90-99;  
	.	(c)  defensive backs: 0-49;  
	.	(d)  running backs, fullbacks, tight ends, H-backs, and wide receivers: 0-49 and 80-89;  
	.	(e)  offensive linemen: 50-79;  
	.	(f)  defensive linemen: 50-79 and 90-99;  
	.	(g)  linebackers: 0-59 and 90-99.  
If a player changes his position during his playing career in the NFL, and such change moves him from a position as an ineligible pass receiver to that of an eligible pass receiver, or from a position as an eligible pass receiver to that of an ineligible pass receiver, he must be issued an appropriate new jersey numeral. A change in jersey numeral is not required if the change is from an ineligible position to another ineligible position, or from an eligible position to another eligible position, provided that the player has participated at least one season at his position prior to the change. 
Any request to wear a numeral for a special position not specified above must be made to the Commissioner. During the preseason period when playing rosters are larger, the League will allow duplication and other temporary deviations from the numbering scheme specified above, but the rule must be adhered to for all players during the regular season and postseason. Clubs must make numerals available to adhere to the rule, even if it requires returning to circulation a numeral that has been retired or withheld for other reasons. See 5-3-1 for reporting a change of position. 
SECTION 2 SUBSTITUTES AND WITHDRAWN PLAYERS 
ARTICLE 1. NUMBER OF PLAYERS IN HUDDLE. There can never be more than 11 players in the offensive huddle while the play clock is running. It is a foul, the whistle is blown immediately, and the ball remains dead. See 5-2-8-a. 
ARTICLE 2. SUBSTITUTE BECOMES PLAYER. A substitute becomes a player when he: (a) participates in at least one play (including a play negated by penalty prior to the snap or during the play); or (b) is on the field of play or the end zone when a snap, fair catch kick, or free kick is made, or when a snap, fair catch kick, or 
free kick is imminent. 
A player becomes a substitute when he is withdrawn from the game and does not participate in at least one play. A play negated by penalty prior to the snap or during the play counts as a missed play. 
ARTICLE 3. LEGAL SUBSTITUTIONS. Any number of substitutes may enter the field of play or the end zone while the ball is dead. 
ARTICLE 4. ILLEGAL SUBSTITUTIONS. If a substitute enters the field of play or the end zone while the ball is in play, it is an illegal substitution. If an illegal substitute interferes with the play, it may be a palpably unfair act (see 12-3-4). 
ARTICLE 5. OFFENSIVE SUBSTITUTIONS. The following are applicable to any offensive substitute who is entering the game: 
	.	(a)  He must move onto the field of play or the end zone as far as the inside of the field numerals prior to the snap to be a legal  substitution. If he does not, and is on the field of play or end zone at the time of a legal snap, he is an illegal substitute.  
	.	(b)  If he approaches the huddle and communicates with a teammate, he is required to participate in at least one play before being withdrawn. After a warning, subsequent violations of this rule shall be penalized for unsportsmanlike conduct. See 5-2-  11.  Note: The intent of the rule is to prevent teams from using simulated substitutions to confuse an opponent, while still permitting a player (or players) to enter and leave without participating in a play in certain situations, such as a change in a coaching decision on fourth down, even though he has approached the huddle and communicated with a teammate. Similarly, if a player who participated in the previous play leaves the playing field by mistake, and returns to the playing field prior to the snap, he is not required to reach the inside of the field numerals, provided the defense has the opportunity to match up with him. However, a substitute (i.e., someone who did not participate in the previous play) is required to reach the inside of the field numerals.  
ARTICLE 6. WITHDRAWN PLAYERS. A player or players who have been replaced must leave the playing field or end zone on 
their own team’s side between the end lines prior to the next snap, free kick, or fair catch kick. 
16 
ARTICLE 7. DISQUALIFIED AND SUSPENDED PLAYERS. A player must be withdrawn and substituted for when he is disqualified (12-2, 12-3) or suspended (5-4). A suspended player may re-enter after at least one legal snap, provided that the reason for his suspension has been corrected. A disqualified player must leave the playing field enclosure and go to the team locker room within a reasonable time. 
ARTICLE 8. PENALTIES FOR ILLEGAL SUBSTITUTION OR WITHDRAWAL. Penalties are: 
	.	(a)  For 12 or more players in the offensive huddle (whistle blown immediately and ball remains dead): Loss of five yards  from the succeeding spot.  
	.	(b)  For a substitute entering the field during a live ball: Loss of five yards.  
	.	(c)  For interference with the play by a substitute who enters the field during a live ball: Palpably unfair act. See 12-3-4.  
	.	(d)  For an offensive substitute who does not move onto the field as far as the inside of the field numerals: Loss of five  yards from the previous spot.  
	.	(e)  For a withdrawn player clearing the field on the opponent’s side or across an end line: Loss of five yards from the  previous spot.  
	.	(f)  For illegal return of a suspended player: Loss of five yards from the previous spot if discovery is made while the ball  is in play, or five yards from the succeeding spot if discovered between downs.  
	.	(g)  For return of a disqualified player: Loss of 15 yards from the previous spot if discovery is made while the ball is in  play, or 15 yards from the succeeding spot if discovered between downs, and, in either case, exclusion from the playing field enclosure.  Note: If the illegal return of a player is not discovered until the end of a down, but prior to the start of the next one, enforcement is from the previous spot when definitely known. Otherwise, enforcement is from the succeeding spot as a foul between downs. See 14-4-9.  
ARTICLE 9. PROCEDURE FOLLOWING TIMEOUT OR CHANGE OF POSSESSION. Following a timeout or change of possession, the offense may huddle outside the numbers near its bench area, but will not be allowed to line up and snap the ball before the defense has an opportunity to match personnel. If the offense snaps the ball before the defense has had an opportunity to complete its substitutions, and a defensive foul for too many players on the field results, no penalties will be enforced, except for personal fouls and unsportsmanlike conduct fouls, and the down will be replayed. At this time, the Referee will notify the head coach that any further use of this tactic will result in a penalty for unsportsmanlike conduct. 
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct after a warning: Loss of 15 yards from the succeeding spot. 
ARTICLE 10. DEFENSIVE MATCHUPS FOLLOWING SUBSTITUTIONS. If a substitution is made by the offense before the two- minute warning of either half, the offense shall not be permitted to snap the ball until the defense has been permitted to respond with its substitutions. While in the process of a substitution (or simulated substitution), the offense is prohibited from rushing quickly to the line of scrimmage and snapping the ball in an obvious attempt to cause a defensive foul (i.e., too many men on the field). If the offense substitutes, the following procedure will apply: 
	.	(a)  The Umpire will stand over the ball until the Referee deems that the defense has had a reasonable time to complete its substitutions.  
	.	(b)  If the offense snaps the ball before the defense has had an opportunity to complete its substitutions, and a defensive foul for too many players on the field results, no penalties will be enforced, except for personal fouls and unsportsmanlike conduct, and the down will be replayed. At this time, the Referee will notify the head coach that any further use of this tactic will result in a penalty for unsportsmanlike conduct. The game clock will be reset to the time remaining when the snap occurred, and the clock will start on the snap.  
	.	(c)  On a fourth-down punting situation, the Referee and the Umpire will not allow a quick snap that prevents the defense from having a reasonable time to complete its substitutions. This applies throughout the entire game.  
	.	(d)  If the play clock expires before the defense has completed its substitution, it is delay of game by the offense.  
ARTICLE 11. UNSPORTSMANLIKE CONDUCT. Using entering substitutes, legally returning players, substitutes on sidelines, or withdrawn players to confuse opponents, or lingering by players leaving the field when being replaced by a substitute, is unsportsmanlike conduct. See 12-3-1-k. The offense is prevented from sending simulated substitutions onto the field toward its huddle and returning them to the sideline without completing the substitution in an attempt to confuse the defense. 
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct: Loss of 15 yards. 
SECTION 3 CHANGES IN POSITION 
ARTICLE 1. REPORTING CHANGE OF POSITION. An offensive player wearing the number of an ineligible pass receiver (50– 79 and 90–99) is permitted to line up in the position of an eligible pass receiver (0–49 and 80–89). An offensive player wearing the number of an eligible pass receiver is permitted to line up in the position of an ineligible pass receiver, provided he lines up within the normal five-player core formed by ineligible players and is not more than two players removed from the middle player of a seven-player line. 
In both cases, the player must immediately report the change in his eligibility status to the Referee, who will inform the defensive team. He must participate in such eligible or ineligible position as long as he is continuously in the game, but prior to each play he must again report his status to the Referee, who will inform the defensive team. The game clock shall not be stopped, and the ball shall not be put in play until the Referee takes his normal position. 
ARTICLE 2. RETURNING TO ORIGINAL POSITION. A player who has reported a change in his eligibility status to the Referee is permitted to return to a position indicated by the eligibility status of his number after: (a) a team time out; (b) the end of a quarter; 
17 
(c) the two-minute warning; (d) a foul; (e) a replay review; (f) a touchdown; 
(g) a kick from scrimmage; (h) a change of possession; or (i) the player has been withdrawn for one legal snap. 
Penalty: For a player failing to notify the Referee of a change in his status when required, or an offensive player with an eligible number reports as ineligible and lines up outside normal five-player core: Loss of five yards for illegal substitution. 
ARTICLE 3. SPEAKERS IN HELMETS. The Coach-to-Player system allows a member of the coaching staff in the bench area or the coaches’ booth to communicate to a designated offensive or defensive player with a speaker in his helmet. The communication begins once a game official has signaled a down to be over and is cut off when the play clock reaches 15 seconds or the ball is snapped, whichever occurs first. 
Each offensive and defensive team is permitted no more than one player on the field with a speaker in his helmet. Each team is permitted to have a maximum of three active radio receivers to be used on offense by its quarterbacks, and a maximum of three active radio receivers to be used on defense by players who have been designated as a primary and backup users. 
Clubs that have a player whose principal position is as a non-quarterback (e.g., wide receiver, running back) and who also is used as a quarterback from time to time must have two helmets for that player—one with and one without radio components. 
When a quarterback enters the game for the first time, or re-enters the game if he has previously been in the game and removed, he must report to the Referee. 
Whenever the backup defensive user enters or re-enters the game wearing a helmet with a speaker, he must report to the Umpire. If the primary defensive user subsequently re-enters the game wearing a helmet with a speaker, he must report to the Umpire. If the primary and backup players have been removed from the game, no other player may wear the radio speaker in his helmet. Teams must use other methods to communicate signals to their players. 
It is not necessary that the offensive player with the speaker in his helmet receive the snap. 
For special teams’ plays, only one player per team with a receiver will be permitted on the field. 
All players that have radio components in their helmet must have a decal, supplied by the League, displayed on the midline of the rear of the helmet. Players who have speakers in their helmets must be identified in the Communication System section of the Game Day Administration Report that is submitted to the Referee or a member of his crew no later than one hour and 30 minutes prior to kickoff. 
For additional requirements and policies pertaining to the system, including regulations for the storage of a backup helmet for a non-quarterback who is used as a quarterback, or for the backup defensive player’s helmet, please refer to the Policy Manual for Member Clubs/Game Operations. 
Penalty: For a player failing to notify the Referee or Umpire of a change in his status when required: Loss of five yards for illegal substitution. 
SECTION 4 EQUIPMENT, UNIFORMS, PLAYER APPEARANCE 
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL POLICY. Throughout the game day period while in view of the stadium and television audience, including during team pregame warm-ups, all players must dress in a professional manner under the uniform standards. The helmet and mandatory padding referenced in Article 3 below are intended to provide reasonable protection to a player while reasonably avoiding risk of injury to other players. The development of Playing Rules should be governed by this Article. Players generally must present an appearance that is appropriate to representing their individual clubs and the National Football League. The term uniform, as used in this policy, applies to every piece of equipment worn by a player, including helmet, shoulder pads, thigh pads, knee pads, and any other item of protective gear, and to every visible item of apparel, including but not limited to pants, jerseys, wristbands, gloves, game socks and/or leg coverings, shoes, visible undergarments, and accessories such as headwear worn under helmets and hand towels. All visible items worn on game day by players must be issued by the club or the League, or, if from outside sources, must have approval in advance by the League office. 
ARTICLE 2. TEAM COLORS. Pursuant to the official colors established for each NFL club in the League Constitution and Bylaws, playing squads are permitted to wear only those colors or a combination of those colors for helmets, jerseys, pants, and game socks and/or leg coverings; provided that white is also an available color for jerseys and mandatory color for the lower portion of game socks and/or leg coverings. (See 5-4-3-Item 6, “Game socks and/or leg coverings,” below). Each player on a given team must wear the same colors on his uniform as all other players on his team in the same game. Home clubs shall choose their jersey color (either white or official team color), and visiting clubs must wear the opposite. For preseason, regular season, or postseason games, the two competing teams may wear jerseys in their official colors (non-white), provided the Commissioner determines that such colors are of sufficient contrast. 
ARTICLE 3. MANDATORY EQUIPMENT, APPAREL. All players must wear the equipment and uniform apparel listed below, which must be of a suitably protective nature and must be designed and produced by a professional football equipment manufacturer. All components recommended by the manufacturer must be present and must not be cut, reduced in size, or otherwise altered unless for medical reasons approved in advance by the Commissioner. During pregame team warm-ups, players may omit certain protective equipment at their option, except that helmets, shoulder pads, thigh pads, and knee pads must be worn. 
18 
Item 1. Helmet, Face Protectors. Helmet with all points of the chin strap (white only) fastened and facemask attached. Facemasks must not be more than 5⁄8-inch in diameter and must be made of rounded material; transparent materials are prohibited. Clear (transparent) plastic eye shields are optional. Tinted eye shields may be worn only after the League office is supplied with appropriate medical documentation and approval is subsequently granted. The League office has final approval. No visible identification of a manufacturer’s name or logo on the exterior of a helmet or on any attachment to a helmet is permitted unless provided for under a commercial arrangement between the League and manufacturer; in no event is identification of any helmet manufacturer permitted on the visible surface of a rear cervical pad. All helmets must carry a small NFL shield logo on the rear lower-left exterior, and an approved warning label on the rear lower-right exterior. Both labels will be supplied in quantity by the League office. 
Item 2. Jerseys. Jersey must cover all pads and other protective equipment worn on the torso and upper arms, and must be appropriately tailored to remain tucked into the uniform pants throughout the game. Jerseys are permitted to be hemmed but the length must be long enough to cover the waist area. Skin exposure due to improperly wearing jerseys is prohibited at all times throughout the game. Tear-away jerseys are prohibited. Mesh jerseys with large fishnet material (commonly referred to as “bullet- hole” or “port-hole” mesh) are also prohibited. Surnames of players in letters a minimum of 21⁄2 inches high must be affixed to the exterior of jerseys across the upper back above the numerals; nicknames are prohibited. All jerseys must carry a small NFL Shield logo at the middle of the yoke of the neck on the front of the garment. All fabrics must be approved by the League office prior to production. For optional equipment permitted to be worn under jerseys, see 5-4-6 Item 1, “Garments Under Jersey” below. 
Item 3. Numerals. Numerals on the back and front of jerseys as specified under NFL rules for the player’s specific position. Such numerals must be a minimum of 8 inches high and 4 inches wide, and their color must be in sharp contrast with the color of the jersey. Smaller numerals should be worn on the tops of the shoulders or upper arms of the jersey. Small numerals on the back of the helmet or on the uniform pants are optional. 
Item 4. Pants. Pants must be worn over the entire knee area; pants shortened or rolled up are prohibited. No part of the pants may be cut away unless an appropriate gusset or other device is used to replace the removed material. All pants must carry a small NFL Shield logo on the front left groin area of the pants, midway between the fly opening and side seam, and 1⁄2-inch below the belt. 
Item 5. Shoulder Pads, Thigh Pads, and Knee Pads. Shoulder pads, thigh pads, and knee pads which have been approved by the League office. All pads must be covered by the outer uniform. Knee pads must be at least 1⁄4-inch thick and must cover the knees. Basketball-type knee pads are permitted, but must be covered by the outer uniform. Punters and placekickers may omit thigh and knee pads. 
Item 6. Game Socks and/or Leg Coverings. Game socks and/or leg coverings must cover the entire area from the shoe to the bottom of the pants, and must meet the pants below the knee. Players are permitted to wear as many layers of game socks and/or leg coverings and tape on the lower leg as they prefer, provided the exterior is either a: (a) one-piece game sock and/or leg covering that includes solid white from the top of the shoe to the mid-point of the lower leg, and approved team color or colors (non-white) from that point to the top of the game sock and/or leg covering; or (b) solid color game sock and/or leg covering (i.e., entire covering from bottom of pant leg to top of shoe), but all players must be in the same covering style and color in any particular game. Solid game socks and/or leg coverings must be a consistent color from the bottom of the pant leg to the top of the shoe. Uniform game socks and/or leg coverings may not be altered (e.g., over-stretched, cut at the toes, or sewn short) in order to bring the line between solid white and team colors lower or higher than the mid-point of the lower leg. Skin exposure of the lower leg and ankle area due to improper wear of game socks and/or leg coverings is prohibited at all times throughout the game. No other game socks and/or leg coverings, and/or opaque tape, may be worn over the one-piece, two-color uniform game socks. Barefoot punters and placekickers may omit the game sock and/or leg covering of the kicking foot in preparation for and during kicking plays. 
Item 7. Shoes. Shoes must be of standard football design, including “sneaker” type shoes such as basketball shoes, cross-training shoes, etc. A player may wear shoes that are black, white, or any Constitutional team color, or any combination of black, white, and a Constitutional team color. Each player may select among shoe styles previously approved by the League office. Logos, names, or other commercial identification on shoes are not permitted to be visible unless advance approval is granted by the League office. Size and location of logos and names on shoes must be approved by the League office. When a shoe logo or name approved by the League is covered with an appropriate use of tape, players will be allowed to cut out the tape covering the original logo or name, provided the cut is clean and is the exact size of the logo or name. The logo or name of the shoe manufacturer must not be re-applied to the exterior of taped shoes unless advance approval is granted by the League office. Kicking shoes must not be modified (including using a shoelace wrapped around toe and/or bottom of the shoe), and any shoe that is worn by a player with an artificial limb on his kicking leg must have a kicking surface that conforms to that of a normal kicking shoe. Punters and placekickers may omit the shoe from the kicking foot in preparation for and during kicking plays. 
ARTICLE 4. OTHER PROHIBITED EQUIPMENT, APPAREL. In addition to the prohibited items of equipment and apparel specified above, the following also are prohibited: 
Item 1. Projecting Objects. Metal or other hard objects that project from a player’s person or uniform, including from his shoes. 
Item 2. Uncovered Hard Objects, Substances. Hard objects, exposed jewelry, and substances, including but not limited to casts, guards or braces for hand, wrist, forearm, elbow, hip, thigh, knee, and shin, unless such items are appropriately covered on all edges and surfaces by a minimum of 3⁄8-inch foam rubber or similar soft material. Any such item worn to protect an injury must not contain colors, designs, logos, or personal messages that are not approved by the NFL, and must be reported by the applicable coaching staff to the Umpire in advance of the game, and a description of the injury must be provided. 
Item 3. Detachable Kicking Toe. 
19 
Item 4. Torn Items. Torn or improperly fitting equipment creating a risk of injury to other players, e.g., the hard surfaces of shoulder pads exposed by a damaged jersey. 
Item 5. Improper Cleats. Shoe cleats made of metal or other material that may chip, fracture, or develop a cutting edge. Conical cleats with concave sides or points which measure less than 3⁄8-inch in diameter at the tips, or cleats with oblong ends which measure less than 1⁄4 by 3⁄4-inch at the end tips are also prohibited. Nylon cleats with flat steel tips are permitted. 
Item 6. Improper Tape. Opaque, contrasting-color tape that covers any part of the helmet, jersey, pants, game socks and/or leg coverings, or shoes; transparent tape or tape of the same color as the background material is permissible for use on these items of apparel. Players may use opaque white, black or one dominant club color tape on hands and arms, provided it conforms to above (“Uncovered Hard Objects, Substances”) and below (“Approved Glove Color”). Opaque tape either black or white on shoes is permitted, provided it is black or white to match the selected dominant shoe choice of the Club, and provided it does not carry up into the game sock and/or leg covering area. 
Item 7. Items Colored Like Football. Headgear or any other equipment or apparel which, in the opinion of the Referee, may confuse an opponent because of its similarity in color to that of the game football. If such color is worn, it must be broken by stripes or other patterns of sharply contrasting color or colors. 
Item 8. Adhesive, Slippery Substances. Adhesive or slippery substances on the body, equipment, or uniform of any player; provided, however, that players may wear gloves with a tackified surface if such tacky substance does not adhere to the football or otherwise cause handling problems for players. 
ARTICLE 5. RECOMMENDED EQUIPMENT. It is recommended that all players wear hip pads designed to reasonably avoid the risk of injury. Unless otherwise provided by individual team policy, it is the players’ responsibility and decision whether to follow this recommendation and use such pads. If worn, such pads must be covered by the outer uniform. 
ARTICLE 6. OPTIONAL EQUIPMENT. Among the types of optional equipment that are permitted to be worn by players are the following: 
Item 1. Garments Under Jerseys. Quarterbacks will be allowed to wear under the game jersey a solid-colored T-shirt, turtleneck, or sweatshirt (consistent with team undergarment color) with sleeves cut to any length, as long as both sleeves are evenly trimmed and the edges are sewn and hemmed. All other players may wear garments under game jerseys only if the undergarment sleeves either (a) are full length to the wrist; or (b) are the half sleeve length as provided by the licensee each of which must be approved by the NFL. Players may not wear long-sleeved undergarments that include pebble-grip sleeves. Undergarments should be tucked in the uniform pants. Any undergarment that is untucked must not hang out from the bottom of the jersey in length longer than the small NFL Shield logo and the manufacturer’s logo located on the front area of the uniform pants, or the undergarment must be tucked in the uniform pants. Any garments under jerseys that are exposed at any point throughout the game and that carry an exposed logo or commercial name/identification must be licensed and approved by the League office for wear on the field. All members of the same team who wear approved undergarments with exposed necks or sleeves must wear the same color on a given day, which color must be white or a solid color that is an official team color (solid means that sleeves must not carry stripes, designs, or team names). Players may not wear undergarments with an exposed hood hanging outside the collar of the jersey. 
Item 2. Approved Glove Color. Gloves, wrappings, elbow pads, and other items worn on the arms below or over the jersey sleeves must be white, black or the official uniform color of the applicable team. Clubs are not required to designate to the League office the color of gloves that will be worn by their players. 
Item 3. Rib Protectors. Rib protectors (“flak jackets”) under the jersey. 
Item 4. Wristbands. Wristbands, provided they are white, black, or an official uniform color of the applicable team only. 
Item 5. Towels. Towels, provided they are white licensed towels approved by the League office for use on the playing field. Players are prohibited from adding to these towels personal messages, logos, names, symbols, or illustrations. Such towels also must be attached to or tucked into the front waist of the pants, and must be no longer than 6 by 8 inches (slightly larger size may be issued to quarterbacks, or may be folded to these limits for wearing in games). A player may wear no more than one towel. Players are prohibited from discarding on the playing field any loose towels or other materials used for wiping hands and the football. Streamers or ribbons, regardless of length, hanging from any part of the uniform, including the helmet, are prohibited. 
Item 6. Headwear. When players are on the field during the pregame, game, and postgame periods, they may wear approved caps, skull caps and bands, approved cold weather gear, or other approved headwear for medical purposes only, as determined by the Commissioner. Any permissible headwear must be approved by the League office, and if worn under the helmet, no portion may hang from or otherwise be visible outside the helmet. Players are not permitted to wear bandannas or other unapproved headwear anywhere on the field during the pregame, game, or postgame periods, even if such items are worn under their helmets. 
ARTICLE 7. LOGOS AND COMMERCIAL IDENTIFICATION. Throughout the period on game day that a player is visible to the stadium and television audience (including in pregame warm-ups, in the bench area, and during postgame interviews in the locker room or on the field), players are prohibited from wearing, displaying, or orally promoting equipment, apparel, or other items that carry commercial names or logos/identifications of companies, unless such commercial identification has been approved in advance by the League office. The size of any approved logo or other commercial identification involved in an agreement between a manufacturer and the League will be modest and unobtrusive, and there is no assurance that it will be visible to the television audience. 
ARTICLE 8. PERSONAL MESSAGES. Throughout the period on game day that a player is visible to the stadium and television audience (including in pregame warm-ups, in the bench area, and during postgame interviews in the locker room or on the field), players are prohibited from wearing, displaying, or otherwise conveying personal messages either in writing or illustration, unless such message has been approved in advance by the League office. Items to celebrate anniversaries or memorable events, or to honor or commemorate individuals, such as helmet decals, and arm bands and jersey patches on players’ uniforms, are prohibited 
20 
unless approved in advance by the League office. All such items approved by the League office, if any, must relate to team or League events or personages. The League will not grant permission for any club or player to wear, display, or otherwise convey messages, through helmet decals, arm bands, jersey patches, mouthpieces, or other items affixed to game uniforms or equipment, which relate to political activities or causes, other non-football events, causes or campaigns, or charitable causes or campaigns. Further, any such approved items must be modest in size, tasteful, non-commercial, and non-controversial; must not be worn for more than one football season; and if approved for use by a specific team, must not be worn by players on other teams in the League. 
ARTICLE 9. GENERAL APPEARANCE. Consistent with the equipment and uniform rules, players must otherwise present a professional and appropriate appearance while before the public on game day. Among the types of activity that are prohibited are use of tobacco products (smokeless included) while in the bench area and use of facial makeup. 
Penalties: 
	.	a)  For violation of this Section 4 discovered during pregame warm-ups or at other times prior to the game, player will  be advised to make appropriate correction; if the violation is not corrected, player will not be permitted to enter the  game.  
	.	b)  For violation of this Section 4 that is discovered while player is in the game, and which involves the competitive or  player safety aspects of the game (e.g., illegal kicking toe of shoe, an adhesive or slippery substance, failure to wear  mandatory equipment), player will be removed from the game until he has complied.  
	.	c)  For any other violation of this Section 4 (e.g., wristbands and mouthpieces that are not League-approved, towel with  a personal message, impermissible headwear under the helmet) that is discovered while the player is in the game, player will be advised to make appropriate correction at the next change of possession; if the violation is not corrected, player will not be permitted to enter the game.  
	.	d)  For violation of this Section 4 detected in the bench area: Player and head coach will be asked to remove the objectionable item, properly equip the player, or otherwise correct the violation. The involved player or players will not be permitted to enter the game until the player has complied.  
	.	e)  For illegal entry or return of a player suspended under this Section 4: Loss of five yards from succeeding spot and removal until properly equipped after one down. See 3-33.  
	.	f)  For repeat violation: Disqualification from game.  Notes:  (1) In addition to the game day penalties specified above, the Commissioner may subsequently impose independent disciplinary action on the club and involved player, up to and including suspension from the team’s next game— preseason, regular season, or postseason, whichever is applicable. 
	.	(2)  If a player is suspended for having adhesive or slippery substances on his body, equipment, or uniform, he must remain out of the game for one play, even if there is a team time out, the two-minute warning, or the end of a period.  
	.	(3)  If a player (kicker) is suspended for having an illegal kicking shoe, he must remain out of the game for one play, unless there is a team time out, the two-minute warning, or the end of the period.  
21 
RULE 6 FREE KICKS 
SECTION 1 PROCEDURES FOR A FREE KICK 
ARTICLE 1. FREE KICK. A free kick is a kickoff or safety kick that puts the ball in play to start a free kick down. It must be made from any point on the kicking team’s restraining line and between the inbounds lines. 
	.	(a)  A kickoff puts the ball in play at the start of each half, after a Try, and after a successful field goal. A dropkick or placekick  may be used for a kickoff.  Note: During a placekick on a kickoff, the kicking team may use a manufactured tee designed to hold the ball no more than one inch from the ground and approved by the League. A holder or tee cannot be used to elevate the ball more than one inch above the ground. Once the ball has been placed on the kicking tee, the kicking tee cannot be moved. If the ball falls off the tee, the covering officials must stop play and restart the timing process without penalty to the kicking team. If the ball falls off the tee a second time during the same free kick down, the kicking team then must either use a player to hold the ball or must kick it off the ground. The ball may be placed on the ground leaning against the tee, provided the tee is in its normal upright position.  
	.	(b)  A safety kick puts the ball in play after a safety. A dropkick, placekick, or punt may be used for a safety kick. A tee cannot be used for a safety kick.  
Penalty: For illegal free kick: Loss of five yards. 
ARTICLE 2. RESTRAINING LINES. The restraining lines for a free kick shall be as follows, unless they are adjusted because of a distance penalty: (a) The restraining line for the kicking team shall be its 35-yard line for a kickoff and its 20-yard line for a safety kick. (b) The restraining line for the receiving team shall be the yard line 10 yards in advance of the kicking team’s restraining line. 
ARTICLE 3. FREE KICK FORMATION. When the ball is kicked on a free kick down: 
	.	(a)  From the time the kicker begins his approach to the ball and until the ball is kicked, 
	.	(1)  all kicking team players other than the kicker must be lined up with at least one foot on the yard line that is one yard behind their restraining line, and both feet must remain on the ground until the ball is kicked; and  
	.	(2)  no more than five players of the kicking team may be on either side of the ball with the holder counting as one of the five on either side; and  
	.	(3)  at least two players (other than a holder) must be lined up inbounds between the sideline and the bottom (outside) of the yard-line number, and at least two players (other than a holder) must be lined up between the top (inside) of the yard- line number and the inbounds lines.  
	.	(b)  All kicking team players must be inbounds and behind the ball when it is kicked, except: (1) the holder of a placekick (3-18-1-Item 2) may be beyond the line, and (2) the kicker may be beyond the line, provided that his kicking foot is not beyond the line.  
	.	(c)  Until the ball is kicked, all receiving team (Team B) players must be inbounds and behind their restraining line, and at least eight, but no more than nine, players must be positioned between their restraining line and a spot 15 yards behind their restraining line (the “setup zone”). (See Section 2, Article 1, Item 2-b).  
Penalty: For a player being beyond the restraining line when the ball is kicked (offside), a player being out of bounds when the ball is kicked, or either team being in an illegal formation when the ball is kicked: Loss of five yards. 
(d) Prior to the ball being touched by the receiving team or the end of the kick, it is a foul if a kicking team player voluntarily goes out of bounds (without being contacted by a receiving team player) to avoid a block. 
Penalty: For voluntarily going out of bounds without contact: Loss of 5 yards. 
ARTICLE 4. CATCH OR RECOVERY OF A FREE KICK. The following applies to the catch or recovery of a free kick: (a) If a player of the receiving team catches or recovers the ball, he may advance. (b) If the ball is declared dead while in the simultaneous possession of two opposing players, the ball is awarded to the receiving 
team. (c) A player of the kicking team may legally touch, catch, or recover the ball if: 
(1) it first touches a receiving team player; or 
(2) it reaches or crosses the receiving team’s restraining line. (d) The ball is dead if: 
	.	(1)  it is caught or recovered by a player of the kicking team. If the catch or recovery is legal, the ball belongs to the kicking team at the dead ball spot.  
	.	(2)  it is not touched by the receiving team and touches the ground in the end zone (touchback).  
(e) If the ball comes to rest anywhere on the field, and no player attempts to possess it, the ball becomes dead and belongs to 
the receiving team at the dead ball spot. 
Notes: 
	.	(1)  A player is deemed to have not touched the ball if it is batted or illegally kicked into him by an opponent. Such touching is ignored, though the bat or kick could be a foul for an illegal bat or illegal kick.  
	.	(2)  For illegal catch or recovery, see 6-2-4.  
ARTICLE 5. FREE KICK CROSSES GOAL LINE. It is a touchback and the dead ball spot is the 25-yard line if a free kick: (a) touches the ground in the end zone before being touched by the receiving team; (b) goes out of bounds behind the receiving team’s goal line; (c) strikes the receiving team’s goal post, uprights, or cross bar; or 
(d) is downed in the end zone by the receiving team. 
22 
ARTICLE 6. END OF FREE KICK. A free kick ends when either team possesses the ball, or when the ball is dead, if that precedes possession. A running play begins when the receiving team establishes possession of the ball. 
SECTION 2 OTHER FREE KICK FOULS 
ARTICLE 1. BLOCKING. Item 1. Kicking Team. 
	.	(a)  Between the Restraining Lines (10 Yards). Until the ball is legally touched, a kicking team player may not block or use his  hands or arms against an opponent between the restraining lines, except to push or pull aside a receiver who is actively attempting to obstruct his attempt to proceed downfield. After the ball is legally touched, a kicking team player may legally block an opponent, and he may use his hands and arms to push or pull an opponent out of the way in a personal attempt to recover the ball.  
	.	(b)  At or Five Yards Beyond Receiving Team’s Restraining Line (Next Five Yards). Until the ball is legally touched or touches the ground, a kicking team player may not block or use his hands or arms against an opponent in the area that is at or no more than five yards beyond the receiving team’s restraining line, except to push or pull aside a receiver who is actively attempting to obstruct his attempt to proceed downfield. After the ball is legally touched or touches the ground, a kicking team player may legally block an opponent anywhere, and he may use his hands and arms to push or pull an opponent out of the way in a personal attempt to recover the ball.  
	.	(c)  More than 15 Yards Beyond Kicking Team’s Restraining Line. The kicking team may legally block more than 15 yards beyond its restraining line.  
During the kick, the kicking team is subject to the blocking restrictions of the defense. 
For the exception prohibiting a block in the back by the kicking team while the ball is in flight, see 12-1-3-b. 
Item 2. Receiving Team. 
	.	(a)  First 15 Yards. Until the ball is legally touched or the ball hits the ground, no player on the receiving team may initiate a block  against the kicking team in the 15-yard area between the kicking team’s restraining line and five yards behind the receiving  team’s restraining line.  
	.	(b)  More than 15 Yards Beyond Kicking Team’s Restraining Line. The receiving team may legally block more than 15 yards  beyond the kicking team’s restraining line.  
	.	(c)  After the ball is kicked, receiving team players are subject to the blocking restrictions of the offense (see 12-1-1 through 12-  1-3), and they may use their hands/arms legally to push or pull an opponent out of the way in a personal attempt to recover the ball.  
Penalty: For illegal blocking or use of hands by either team: Loss of 10 yards. 
	.	(d)  A “double team block” is permissible only by players who were initially lined up in the setup zone at the time of the kick. A double team block is defined as two or more players who contact an opponent at the same time. Any other players may not participate in a double team block at any time during a kick or during a return.  
	.	(e)  A “wedge block” is not permitted by any players at any time. A wedge block is defined as two or more players intentionally aligning shoulder-to-shoulder within two yards of each other, and who move forward together. The foul for a wedge block occurs at that point; actual contact with an opponent is not necessary.  
Penalty: For an illegal wedge block or an illegal double team block: Loss of 15 yards. If the foul occurs during the kick, enforcement is from the spot of the foul. If the foul occurs during the return, the penalty is enforced as customary. If the foul occurs in the receiving team’s end zone during the kick, it is enforced from the previous spot. 
ARTICLE 2. RUNNING INTO FREE KICKER. A player of the receiving team is not permitted to run into the kicker before he recovers his balance. See also 12-2-8-i for personal fouls against the kicker. 
Penalty: For running into the kicker: Loss of five yards. 
ARTICLE 3. FREE KICK OUT OF BOUNDS. The kicking team may not kick the ball out of bounds or be the last to touch the ball before it goes out of bounds between the goal lines. If the receiving team is the last to touch the ball before it goes out of bounds, the receiving team puts the ball in play at the inbounds spot. 
Penalty: For a kickoff out of bounds: The receiving team may elect to take possession of the ball 25 yards from the spot of the kick at the inbounds line on the side of the field where the ball went out of bounds, or at the out of bounds spot. 
Penalty: For a safety kick out of bounds: The receiving team may elect to take possession of the ball 30 yards from the spot of the kick at the inbounds line on the side of the field where the ball went out of bounds, or at the out of bounds spot. 
ARTICLE 4. FREE KICK ILLEGALLY TOUCHED. Item 1. Ball Reaches Restraining Line. A player of the kicking team may not touch, catch, or recover the ball before it has reached the receiving team’s restraining line, unless it has first been touched by a receiving team player. 
Penalty: For illegal touching of a free kick by the kicking team: Loss of five yards, or the receiving team takes possession of the ball at the spot of the illegal touch. 
Item 2. Player Out of Bounds. If a kicking team player goes out of bounds during the kick, either of his own volition or by being legally forced out of bounds, he may not touch or recover the ball beyond the receiving team’s restraining line, unless it has first been touched by a receiving team player. If a kicking team player touches the ball before re-establishing himself legally inbounds, it is a free kick out of bounds. 
Penalty: For illegal touching of a free kick by the kicking team: Loss of five yards. 
23 
SECTION 3 ENFORCEMENT OF FOULS 
ARTICLE 1. ENFORCEMENT FROM PREVIOUS SPOT. If there is a foul during a free kick, enforcement is from the previous spot, and the free kick is made again. However, if the kicking team commits a foul prior to the end of the kick, and the receiving team retains possession throughout the down, it will have the option of enforcing the penalty at the previous spot and replaying the down or adding the penalty yardage to the dead ball spot. The dead ball spot for free kicks that result in a touchback is the 25-yard line. 
Exceptions: 
	.	(a)  A personal foul (blocking) after a fair catch signal is enforced from the spot of the foul or the previous spot if it occurs in Team B’s end zone;  
	.	(b)  A foul for fair catch interference is enforced from the spot of the foul;  
	.	(c)  A foul for interference with the opportunity to make a catch is enforced from the spot of the foul;  
	.	(d)  A foul for an invalid fair catch signal is enforced from the spot of the foul or the previous spot if it occurs in Team B’s end  zone;  
	.	(e)  A foul for an illegal double team block, or an illegal wedge block, during the kick is enforced from the spot of the foul or  the previous spot if it occurs in Team B’s end zone;  
	.	(f)  For a free kick out of bounds, see Section 2, Article 3; or  
	.	(g)  For a free kick illegally touched, see Section 2, Article 4.  
Note: 
(1) In (a), (b), (c), and (e) above, if the foul is not part of a double foul and the opponent has possession at the end of the down, the foul may be enforced from the dead ball spot. See 14-2-4. 
24 
RULE 7 BALL IN PLAY, DEAD BALL, SCRIMMAGE 
SECTION 1 BALL IN PLAY 
ARTICLE 1. LIVE BALL. After the ball has been declared ready for play, it becomes a live ball when it is legally snapped or legally kicked (a free kick or fair catch kick). The ball remains dead if it is snapped or kicked before it is made ready for play. 
SECTION 2 DEAD BALL 
ARTICLE 1. DEAD BALL DECLARED. An official shall declare the ball dead and the down ended: 
	.	(a)  when a runner is contacted by an opponent and touches the ground with any part of his body other than his hands (including the wrist) or feet (including the ankle);  
	.	(b)  when a runner is held or otherwise restrained so that his forward progress ends;  
	.	(c)  when a quarterback immediately drops to his knee (or simulates dropping to his knee) behind the line of scrimmage;  Note: If a quarterback does not immediately drop to a knee, and contact from a rushing defender is unavoidable, it is not a foul unless the defender commits some other act that would constitute unnecessary roughness.  
	.	(d)  when a runner declares himself down by: (1) falling to the ground or kneeling, and clearly making no immediate effort to advance; or (2) sliding. When a runner slides feet or head first or simulates sliding, the ball is dead the instant he touches the ground  with anything other than his hands or his feet, or begins to simulate touching the ground;  Notes:  (1) Defenders are required to treat a sliding runner as they would a runner who is down by contact. (2) A defender must pull up when a runner begins a slide. This does not mean that all contact by a defender is illegal. If a defender has already committed himself, and the contact is unavoidable, it is not a foul unless the defender makes forcible contact into the head or neck area of the runner with the helmet, shoulder, or forearm, or commits some other  act that is unnecessary roughness. (3) A runner who desires to take advantage of this protection is responsible for starting his slide before contact by a defensive  player is imminent; if he does not, and waits until the last moment to begin his slide, he puts himself in jeopardy of being contacted.  
	.	(e)  when a runner is out of bounds;  
	.	(f)  when an opponent takes a ball that is in the possession of a runner who is on the ground;  
	.	(g)  when a forward pass (legal or illegal) is incomplete (See 8-1-4);  
	.	(h)  when any legal or illegal kick touches the receivers’ goal posts or crossbar, unless it scores a field goal (See 9-4-2);  
	.	(i)  when a loose ball comes to rest anywhere in the field, and no player attempts to recover it; the official covering the play should  pause momentarily before signaling that the ball is dead. Any legal (or illegal) kick is awarded to the receivers, and any other ball is awarded to the team last in possession. When awarded to a team behind a goal line, the ball is placed on the one-yard line;  
	.	(j)  when any legal or illegal kick is caught or recovered by the kickers, except a scrimmage kick that is kicked from behind the line and is recovered behind the line (See 9-3-2-Item 3 for exception);  
	.	(k)  when a touchdown, touchback, safety, field goal, or Try has been made;  
	.	(l)  when any receiver catches or recovers the ball after a fair catch signal (valid or invalid) has been made, provided the ball has  not been touched by an opponent, before or after it strikes the ground;  
	.	(m)  when an official sounds the whistle erroneously while the ball is still in play; 
	.	(1)  If the ball is in player possession, the team in possession may elect to put the ball in play where it has been declared dead or to replay the down.  
	.	(2)  If the ball is a loose ball resulting from a fumble, backward pass, or illegal forward pass, the team last in possession may elect to put the ball in play at the spot where possession was lost or to replay the down.  
	.	(3)  If the ball is a loose ball resulting from a legal forward pass, a free kick, a fair catch kick, or a scrimmage kick, the ball is returned to the previous spot, and the down is replayed.  
	.	(4)  If there is a foul by either team during any of the above, and the team in possession at the time of the erroneous whistle elects not to replay the down, penalty enforcement is the same as for fouls during a run, forward pass, kick, fumble, and backward pass. If the team in possession elects to replay the down, all penalties will be disregarded, except for personal fouls and unsportsmanlike conduct fouls, which will be administered prior to the replaying of the down. If the down is replayed, the game clock will be reset to the time remaining when the snap occurred, and the clock will start on the snap.  
	.	(n)  when a fumble is recovered or caught by a teammate of the fumbling player, and the fumble occurs on a play that is subject to the “two-minute”, “Try”, or “fourth-down” fumble provisions (See 8-7-5 and 8-7-6);  
	.	(o)  when the ball is out of bounds;  
	.	(p)  if a loose ball in play strikes a video board, guide wire, sky cam, or any other object, the ball will be dead immediately, and  the down will be replayed at the previous spot. In the event the down is replayed, the game clock will be reset to the time remaining when the snap occurred, and the clock will start on the snap. All penalties will be disregarded, except for personal fouls or Unsportsmanlike Conduct fouls, which will be administered prior to the replaying of the down; or  
	.	(q)  when a runner’s helmet comes completely off.  
ARTICLE 2. BALL TOUCHES OFFICIAL. The ball is not dead because it touches an official who is inbounds, or because of a signal by an official other than a whistle. 
SECTION 3 NEW SERIES OF DOWNS 
ARTICLE 1. NEW SERIES FOR TEAM A. A new series of four scrimmage downs is awarded to Team A when the following 
conditions exist: 
25 
(a) During a given series, the ball is declared dead in possession of Team A while at or beyond the line to gain; (b) Enforcement of a foul by Team B results in the placement of the ball at or beyond the line to gain, 
or if the enforcement of a foul awards an automatic first down to Team A; (c) If there is a change of possession during the down, and Team A has possession at the end of the down; (d) The kicking team recovers a scrimmage kick anywhere in the field of play after it first has been touched beyond the line of 
scrimmage by the receivers; or (e) The kicking team legally recovers a free kick. 
ARTICLE 2. NEW SERIES FOR TEAM B. A new series of four scrimmage downs is awarded to Team B when the following conditions exist: (a) Team A fails to advance the ball to the line to gain during a series of downs; (b) There is a change of possession during the down, and Team B has possession at the end of the down, or has been awarded 
possession at the end of the down; or (c) When the ball is declared dead in possession of the receiving team after a free kick, scrimmage kick, or fair catch kick. 
ARTICLE 3. FORWARD PART OF BALL. The forward part of the ball in its position when it is declared dead in the field of play shall be the determining point in measuring any distance gained or lost. The ball shall be rotated so that its long axis is parallel to the sidelines before measuring, while maintaining the forward most point. When an airborne player of either team completes a catch or interception inbounds after an opponent has driven him backward, the ball is declared dead, and forward progress is awarded at the spot where initial contact by the opponent was made after the player established control of the ball while in the air. 
SECTION 4 ACTION AT OR BEFORE THE SNAP 
ARTICLE 1. BALL READY FOR PLAY. After the neutral zone has been established (ball is made or declared ready for play), an offensive player may not make a false start, a defensive player may not encroach (initiate contact with a member of the offensive team) or commit a neutral zone infraction, and no player of either team may be offside when the ball is put in play. 
ARTICLE 2. FALSE START. It is a false start if the ball has been placed ready for play, and, prior to the snap, an offensive player who has assumed a set position moves in such a way as to simulate the start of a play, or if an offensive player who is in motion makes a sudden movement toward the line of scrimmage. Any quick abrupt movement by a single offensive player, or by several offensive players in unison, which simulates the start of the snap, is a false start, and the official shall blow the whistle immediately, whether the snap is made or there is a reaction by the defense. 
Note: See 4-6-5-d, for actions by a defensive player who attempts to cause an offensive player to commit a false start. Item 1. Interior Lineman. It is a false start if an interior lineman (tackle to tackle) takes or simulates a three-point stance, and 
then changes his position or moves the hand that is on the ground. An interior lineman who is in a two-point stance is permitted to reset in a three-point stance or change his position, provided that 
he comes to a complete stop prior to the snap. If he does not come to a complete stop prior to the snap, it is a false start. 
Item 2. Eligible Receiver. If all 11 offensive players have been set for at least one full second, and an eligible receiver who is on the line of scrimmage moves forward, it is a false start, regardless of whether the action is quick and abrupt or slow and deliberate. 
If an eligible receiver who is on the line of scrimmage moves backward immediately prior to the snap and does not come to a complete stop before the snap, it is a false start. 
Any eligible receiver is permitted to change from a two-point stance to a three-point stance, or from a three-point stance to a two- point stance, provided he comes to a complete stop prior to the snap. If he does not come to a complete stop, it is a false start. 
Item 3. T-Formation Quarterback. It is legal for a T-Formation Quarterback to go in motion, whether he has placed his hands under center, on his knees, or on the body of the center. However, it is a false start, if the action is quick and abrupt. If the player fails to come to a complete stop for at least one full second prior to the ball being snapped, it is illegal motion. 
Item 4. Shotgun Formation. A player who is in position to receive the snap in shotgun formation is permitted to shift his feet prior to the snap, but any quick and abrupt movement is a false start. This includes thrusting his hands forward when there is not a simultaneous snap. 
Item 5. Attempt to Draw Offside. Any obvious attempt by the quarterback or other player in position to receive the snap to draw an opponent offside is a false start. 
Item 6. Offense Not Set. With the game clock running after the two-minute warning of either half, if all 11 offensive players are not set simultaneously for one full second prior to the snap, it is a false start. 
Penalty: For a false start: Loss of five yards from the line of scrimmage. The penalty is enforced prior to the snap. ARTICLE 3. ENCROACHMENT. It is encroachment if a defensive player enters the neutral zone and contacts an offensive player 
or the ball prior to the snap, or if he interferes with the ball during the snap. Officials are to blow their whistles immediately. 
Penalty: For encroachment: Loss of five yards from the line of scrimmage. The penalty is enforced prior to the snap. 
ARTICLE 4. NEUTRAL ZONE INFRACTION. It is a neutral zone infraction when the following occur. Officials are to blow their whistles immediately: (a) a defender moves beyond the neutral zone prior to the snap and is parallel to or beyond an offensive lineman, with an 
unimpeded path to the quarterback or kicker, even though no contact is made by a blocker; (b) a defender enters the neutral zone prior to the snap, causing the offensive player(s) in close proximity (including a T-Formation 
Quarterback) to react (move) immediately to protect himself (themselves) against impending contact. If there is no immediate 
reaction by the offensive player(s) in close proximity, and the defensive player returns to a legal position prior to the snap 
26 
without contacting an opponent, there is no foul. A flexed or split receiver is considered to be in close proximity if he is lined up on the side of the ball on which the violation occurs; other offensive players are considered to be in close proximity if they are within two-and-one-half positions of the defender who enters the neutral zone. If the defender is directly over the center, a T-Formation Quarterback, the center, and the guards and tackles on both sides of the center are considered to be within close proximity; if the defender is in a gap, the two offensive players on either side of the gap are considered to be within close proximity (including a T-Formation Quarterback, if applicable); or 
(c) during the last two minutes of a half the ball is snapped before all members of the defensive team are on their side of the line of scrimmage. The offense must be legally set. 
Penalty: For a neutral zone infraction: Loss of five yards from line of scrimmage. Penalty is enforced prior to snap. ARTICLE 5. OFFSIDE. A player is offside when any part of his body is in or beyond the neutral zone or beyond a restraining line 
when the ball is put in play. 
Penalty: For offside: Loss of five yards. 
ARTICLE 6. COMPLETE STOP. All offensive players are required to come to a complete stop and be in a set position simultaneously for at least one full second prior to the snap. Failure to do so is an illegal shift. (See 7-4-2-Item 6 for such a foul after the two-minute warning of either half). 
ARTICLE 7. SHIFTS. The offensive team must present a legal formation before and after a shift. It is permitted to shift and have two or more players in motion multiple times before the snap. However, after the last shift, all players must come to a complete stop and be in a set position simultaneously for at least one full second. 
If any eligible backfield player goes in motion (one at a time) after the last shift and comes to a complete stop, there is no requirement for a full second pause before a second player can legally go in motion. 
However, if the first player has not come to a complete stop when the second player goes in motion, it is another shift and requires another simultaneous stop for at least one full second by all players. 
It is also an illegal shift if a T-Formation Quarterback goes in motion and fails to come to a complete stop for at least one full second before a second player goes in motion. 
Penalty: For an illegal shift: Loss of five yards. 
ARTICLE 8. ILLEGAL MOTION. When the ball is snapped, one player who is lined up in the backfield may be in motion, provided that he is moving parallel to or away from the line of scrimmage. No player is permitted to be moving toward the line of scrimmage when the ball is snapped. All other players must be stationary in their positions. 
If an eligible receiver who is on the line moves to another position on the line (not forward), he must come to a complete stop prior to the snap. If he does not come to a complete stop, it is illegal motion. 
It is also illegal motion if a T-Formation Quarterback goes in motion and fails to come to a complete stop for at least one full second prior to the snap. 
Penalty: For a player illegally in motion at the snap: Loss of five yards. 
SECTION 5 POSITION OF PLAYERS AT THE SNAP 
ARTICLE 1. OFFENSIVE TEAM. The offensive team must be in compliance with the following at the snap: (a) It must have seven or more players on the line (3-19) (b) Eligible receivers must be on both ends of the line, and all of the players on the line between them must be ineligible receivers (c) No player may be out of bounds 
Note: Offensive linemen may lock legs. Penalty: For illegal formation by the offense: Loss of five yards. 
SECTION 6 PUTTING THE BALL IN PLAY 
ARTICLE 1. BALL IN PLAY. The offensive team must put the ball in play with a snap at the spot where the previous down ended, unless the enforcement of a penalty moves the ball to another spot or the down ended outside the inbounds lines. If a fair catch kick is chosen after a fair catch, 10-2-4-a and 11-4-3 apply. 
ARTICLE 2. SNAP AT INBOUNDS SPOT. The ball is next put in play at the inbounds spot by the team entitled to possession (7- 1-1 and 7-4-1) when: (a) a loose ball other than an incomplete forward pass is out of bounds between the goal lines; (b) a runner is out of bounds between the goal lines; 
(c) the ball is dead in a side zone (see 1-1-1); (d) the ball is placed in the side zone as the result of a penalty enforcement; or (e) a fair catch is made or awarded in a side zone. 
ARTICLE 3. RESTRICTIONS FOR SNAPPER. The snap (3-32) may be made by any offensive player who is on the line of scrimmage but must conform to the following provisions: (a) The snap must start with the ball on the ground, with its long axis at right angles to the line. (b) It is not necessary that the snap be between the snapper’s legs, but it must be one quick and continuous motion of the hand 
or hands of the snapper. The ball must leave or be taken from his hands during this motion. 
27 
(c) The snapper may not snap the ball after it is ready for play until all of the officials have had a reasonable time to assume their normal positions. If this occurs, the ball remains dead, and no penalty is assessed unless it is a repeated act after a warning (delay of game). 
Penalty: For illegally snapping the ball: Loss of five yards from the line of scrimmage. 
ARTICLE 4. LEGAL SNAP. A snap is a backward pass. The snap must be received by a player who is not on the line at the snap, unless the ball first strikes the ground. If the ball first strikes the ground, or is muffed by an eligible backfield receiver, or a T-Formation Quarterback, it can be recovered and advanced by any player. 
Penalty: For snapping the ball to an ineligible snap receiver: Loss of five yards from the line of scrimmage. The whistle shall be blown immediately. 
28 
RULE 8 FORWARD PASS, BACKWARD PASS, FUMBLE 
SECTION 1 FORWARD PASS 
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITION. It is a forward pass if: (a) the ball initially moves forward (to a point nearer the opponent’s goal line) after leaving the passer’s hand(s); (b) the ball first strikes the ground, a player, an official, or anything else at a point that is nearer the opponent’s goal line than the 
point at which the ball leaves the passer’s hand(s); or (c) a ball is intentionally fumbled and goes forward. 
Item 1. Forward Movement of Hand. When a player is in control of the ball and is attempting to pass it forward, any intentional forward movement of his hand starts a forward pass. 
	.	(a)  If contact by an opponent materially affects a passer after the passer begins his throwing motion, it is a forward pass if he  passes the ball, regardless of where the ball strikes the ground, a player, an official, or anything else. When this occurs,  intentional grounding rules do not apply.  
	.	(b)  When a passer intends to throw a forward pass and is contacted by an opponent before beginning his throwing motion, the  direction of the pass is the responsibility of the passer if he passes the ball, and intentional grounding rules apply.  
	.	(c)  If, after an intentional forward movement of his hand, the passer loses possession of the ball during an attempt to bring it  back toward his body, it is a fumble.  
	.	(d)  If the passer loses possession of the ball while attempting to re-cock his arm, it is a fumble.  
ARTICLE 2. LEGAL FORWARD PASS. The offensive team may make one forward pass from behind the line during each down. If the ball, whether in player possession or loose, crosses the line of scrimmage, a forward pass is not permissible, regardless of whether the ball returns behind the line of scrimmage before the pass is thrown. 
Item 1. Illegal Passes. Any other forward pass by either team is illegal and is a foul by the passing team, including: (a) A forward pass thrown when the passer’s entire body and the ball are beyond the line of scrimmage when the ball is released, whether the passer is airborne or touching the ground. (b) A second forward pass thrown from behind the line of scrimmage. (c) A forward pass thrown after the ball has crossed the line of scrimmage and has returned behind it. (d) A forward pass thrown after there has been a change of possession. 
Item 2. Intercepted Illegal Pass. If an illegal pass is caught or intercepted, the ball may be advanced and the penalty declined. 
Penalties: (a) For a forward pass from beyond the line: Loss of down and five yards from the spot where the ball is released. (b) For a second forward pass from behind the line, or for a forward pass that was thrown after the ball returned behind 
the line: Loss of down and five yards from the previous spot. (c) For a forward pass that is thrown after a change of possession: Loss of five yards from where the ball is released. 
Notes: 
	.	(1)  Eligibility, pass interference, and intentional grounding rules apply when a forward pass is thrown from behind the line, regardless of whether the pass is an illegal forward pass. Eligibility, pass interference, and intentional grounding rules do not apply if a forward pass is thrown (a) from beyond the line, (b) on a free kick play, (c) on a fair catch kick play, or (d) after a change of possession.  
	.	(2)  Roughing the passer rules apply on all passes (legal or illegal) thrown from behind the line of scrimmage (12-2-11). If a pass is thrown from beyond the line of scrimmage, unnecessary roughness may apply for action against the passer.  
ARTICLE 3. COMPLETED OR INTERCEPTED PASS. A player who makes a catch may advance the ball. A forward pass is complete (by the offense) or intercepted (by the defense) in the field of play, at the sideline, or in the end zone if a player, who is inbounds: (a) secures control of the ball in his hands or arms prior to the ball touching the ground; and 
(b) touches the ground inbounds with both feet or with any part of his body other than his hands; and (c) after (a) and (b) have been fulfilled, performs any act common to the game (e.g., tuck the ball away, extend it forward, take 
an additional step, turn upfield, or avoid or ward off an opponent), or he maintains control of the ball long enough to do so. 
Notes: 
(1) Movement of the ball does not automatically result in loss of control. (2) If a player, who satisfied (a) and (b), but has not satisfied (c), contacts the ground and loses control of the ball, it is an 
incomplete pass if the ball hits the ground before he regains control, or if he regains control out of bounds. (3) A receiver is considered a player in a defenseless posture (See Rule 12, Section 2, Article 9) throughout the entire 
process of the catch and until the player is capable of avoiding or warding off the impending contact of an opponent. (4) If a pass is caught simultaneously by two eligible opponents, and both players retain it, the ball belongs to the passers. It is not a simultaneous catch if a player gains control first and an opponent subsequently gains joint control. If the ball is muffed after simultaneous touching by two such players, all the players of the passing team become eligible to catch the 
loose ball. (5) If a player, who is in possession of the ball, is held up and carried out of bounds by an opponent before both feet or any 
part of his body other than his hands touches the ground inbounds, it is a completed or intercepted pass. It is not necessary for the player to maintain control of the ball when he lands out of bounds. 
ARTICLE 4. INCOMPLETE PASS. An incomplete pass is a loss of down, and the ball returns to the previous spot. Any forward pass (legal or illegal) is incomplete and the ball is dead immediately if: 
(a) The process of the catch in 8-1-3 is not completed; 
29 
(b) The ball goes out of bounds; or (c) A player is the first to touch a pass after having been out of bounds, but prior to re-establishing himself inbounds with 
both feet or any body part other than his hands. There is not a foul for illegal touching. 
Note: If there is any question whether a forward pass is complete, intercepted, or incomplete, it is to be ruled incomplete. 
ARTICLE 5. ELIGIBLE RECEIVERS. The following players are eligible to catch a forward pass that is thrown from behind the line of scrimmage. (a) Defensive players; (b) Offensive players who are on either end of the line, provided they either have the numbers of eligible players (0–49 and 80– 
89) or have legally reported to play a position on the end of the line. See 5-1-2; (c) Offensive players who are legally at least one yard behind the line at the snap, provided they either have the numbers of 
eligible players (0–49 and 80–89) or have legally reported to play a position in the backfield; (d) All offensive players after the ball has been touched by any defensive player or any eligible offensive player; or (e) An eligible receiver who is forced out of bounds by an opponent’s foul, provided he attempts to return inbounds immediately 
and re-establishes inbounds with both feet or with any body part other than his hands, without prior touching. 
ARTICLE 6. INELIGIBLE RECEIVERS. All offensive players other than those identified in Article 5 above are ineligible to catch a legal or illegal forward pass thrown from behind the line of scrimmage, including: (a) Players who are not on either end of their line or at least one yard behind it when the ball is snapped. (b) Offensive players wearing numbers 50–79, unless they have reported a change in their eligibility status to the Referee and 
have assumed a position on the end of their line or in their backfield as required by Article 5; (c) Players who fail to notify the Referee of being eligible when required; (d) An eligible receiver who has been out of bounds prior to or during a pass, either by his own volition or by being legally forced 
out, even if he has re-established himself inbounds with both feet or with any part of his body other than his hands; or (e) A player who takes his stance as a T-Formation Quarterback is not an eligible receiver unless, before the ball is snapped, he legally moves to a position at least one yard behind the line of scrimmage or on the end of the line, and is stationary in 
that position for at least one second before the snap. 
ARTICLE 7. LEGAL TOUCHING. A forward pass (legal or illegal) thrown from behind the line may be touched by any eligible player. A pass in flight may be tipped, batted, or deflected in any direction by any eligible player at any time, including such a pass in the end zone. 
ARTICLE 8. ILLEGAL TOUCHING OF A FORWARD PASS. It is a foul for illegal touching if a forward pass (legal or illegal) thrown from behind the line of scrimmage: (a) is first touched intentionally or is caught by an originally ineligible offensive player. If such a pass is caught, it is a live ball; or 
Penalty: For illegal touching of a forward pass: Loss of five yards at the previous spot. 
(b) first touches or is caught by an eligible offensive receiver who has gone out of bounds, either of his own volition or by being legally forced out of bounds, and has re-established himself inbounds. If such a pass is caught, it is a live ball. 
Penalty: For illegal touching of a forward pass after being out of bounds: Loss of down at the previous spot. 
SECTION 2 INTENTIONAL GROUNDING 
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITION. It is a foul for intentional grounding if a passer, facing an imminent loss of yardage because of pressure from the defense, throws a forward pass without a realistic chance of completion. A realistic chance of completion is defined as a pass that is thrown in the direction of and lands in the vicinity of an originally eligible offensive receiver. 
Item 1. Passer or Ball Outside Pocket Area. Intentional grounding will not be called when a passer, who is outside, or has been outside, the pocket area, throws a forward pass that lands at or beyond the line of scrimmage extended (including when the ball lands out of bounds over the sideline or endline), even if no offensive player(s) have a realistic chance to catch the ball. If a loose ball leaves the pocket area, this area no longer exists; if the ball is recovered, all intentional grounding rules apply as if the passer is outside pocket area. 
Item 2. Physical Contact. Intentional grounding should not be called if: 
	.	(a)  the passer initiates his passing motion toward an eligible receiver and then is significantly affected by physical contact from a  defensive player that causes the pass to land in an area that is not in the direction and vicinity of an eligible receiver; or  
	.	(b)  the passer is out of the pocket, and his passing motion is significantly affected by physical contact from a defensive player  that causes the ball to land short of the line of scrimmage.  
Item 3. Stopping Clock. A T-Formation Quarterback is permitted to stop the game clock legally to conserve time if, immediately upon receiving the snap, he begins a continuous throwing motion and throws the ball directly into the ground. 
Item 4. Delayed Spike. A passer, after delaying his passing action for strategic purposes, is prohibited from throwing the ball to the ground in front of him, even if he is under no pressure from defensive rusher(s). 
Penalty: For intentional grounding: (a) loss of down and 10 yards from the previous spot; or (b) loss of down at the spot of the pass if the spot is more than 10 yards from the previous spot or more than half the 
distance to the goal line; or (c) a safety if the passer’s entire body and the ball are in his end zone when the ball is thrown. See 4-7 for actions to 
conserve time inside two minutes of either half. 
30 
SECTION 3 INELIGIBLE PLAYER DOWNFIELD 
ARTICLE 1. LEGAL AND ILLEGAL ACTS. On a scrimmage play during which a legal forward pass is thrown, it is a foul if the entire body of an ineligible offensive player, including a T-Formation Quarterback, is more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage before the pass has been thrown. 
Item 1. Legally Downfield. An ineligible player is not illegally downfield if, after initiating contact with an opponent within one yard of the line of scrimmage during his initial charge: (a) he moves more than one yard beyond the line while legally blocking or being blocked by an opponent; (b) after breaking legal contact with an opponent more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage, he remains stationary until 
a forward pass is thrown; or (c) after losing legal contact with an opponent more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage, he is forced behind the line of 
scrimmage by an opponent, at which time he is again subject to normal blocking restrictions for an ineligible offensive player. 
Note: If an ineligible offensive player moves beyond the line while legally blocking or being blocked by an opponent, an eligible offensive player may catch a pass between them and the line of scrimmage. 
Item 2. Illegally Downfield. An ineligible offensive player is illegally downfield if: (a) his entire body is more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage without contacting an opponent; (b) after losing contact with an opponent within one yard of the line of scrimmage, he advances so his entire body is more than 
one yard beyond the line of scrimmage; or (c) after losing contact with an opponent with his entire body more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage, he continues to 
move toward his opponent’s goal line. 
Penalty: For ineligible offensive player downfield: Loss of five yards from the previous spot. 
ARTICLE 2. AFTER PASS IS THROWN. After the ball leaves the passer’s hand, ineligible pass receivers can advance more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage, or beyond the position reached by their initial charge, provided that they do not block or contact a defensive player, who is more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage, until the ball is touched by a player of either team. Such prior blocking and/or contact is pass interference if it occurs in the vicinity of where the ball is thrown. See 8-3- 1-Note above for exception when blocker maintains continuous contact. 
SECTION 4 LEGAL AND ILLEGAL CONTACT WITH ELIGIBLE RECEIVERS 
ARTICLE 1. LEGAL CONTACT WITHIN FIVE YARDS. Within the area five yards beyond the line of scrimmage, a defensive player may chuck an eligible receiver in front of him. The defender is allowed to maintain continuous and unbroken contact within the five-yard zone, so long as the receiver has not moved beyond a point that is even with the defender. 
ARTICLE 2. ILLEGAL CONTACT WITHIN FIVE YARDS. Within the five-yard zone, if the player who receives the snap remains in the pocket with the ball, a defender may not make initial contact in the back of a receiver, nor may he maintain contact after the receiver has moved beyond a point that is even with the defender. If a defender contacts a receiver within the five-yard zone, loses contact, and then contacts him again within the five-yard zone, it is a foul for illegal contact. 
ARTICLE 3. ILLEGAL CONTACT BEYOND FIVE-YARD ZONE. Beyond the five-yard zone, if the player who receives the snap remains in the pocket with the ball, a defender cannot initiate contact with a receiver who is attempting to evade him. A defender may use his hands or arms only to defend or protect himself against impending contact caused by a receiver. If a defender contacts a receiver within the five-yard zone and maintains contact with him, he must release the receiver as they exit the five- yard zone. 
ARTICLE 4. INCIDENTAL CONTACT BEYOND FIVE-YARD ZONE. Beyond the five-yard zone, incidental contact may exist between receiver and defender. 
Penalty: For illegal contact by the defense: Loss of five yards and automatic first down. 
ARTICLE 5. ILLEGAL CUT BLOCK. It is an illegal cut block if: 
	.	(a)  an eligible receiver who takes a position more than two yards outside of his own tackle (flexed receiver) is blocked below the  waist at, behind, or beyond the line of scrimmage; or  
	.	(b)  an eligible receiver who is lined up within two yards of the tackle, whether on or behind the line, is blocked below the waist  after he goes beyond the line of scrimmage (such players may be blocked below the waist at or behind the line of scrimmage).  
Penalty: For illegal cut block: Loss of 15 yards and automatic first down. 
ARTICLE 6. DEFENSIVE HOLDING. It is defensive holding if a player grasps an eligible offensive player (or his jersey) with his hands, or extends an arm or arms to cut off or encircle him. See 12-1-6. Any offensive player who pretends to possess the ball, and/or one to whom a teammate pretends to give the ball, may be tackled until he leaves the pocket area. 
Penalty: For holding by the defense: Loss of five yards and automatic first down. 
ARTICLE 7. END OF RESTRICTIONS. If the quarterback or the receiver of the snap demonstrates no further intention to pass the ball (i.e., hands off or pitches the ball to another player, throws a forward or backward pass, loses possession of the ball by a muff that touches the ground or a fumble, or if he is tackled) the restrictions on the defensive team prohibiting illegal contact, or an illegal cut block, against an eligible receiver will end, and a defensive player is permitted to use his hands, arms, or body to push, pull, or ward off an offensive receiver, pursuant to Rule 12, Section 1, Article 5. If the quarterback leaves the pocket area with the ball in his possession, the restrictions on illegal contact and an illegal cut block both end, but the restriction on defensive holding remains in effect. 
31 
If a team presents an apparent punting formation, defensive acts that normally constitute illegal contact (chuck beyond five yards, etc.) are permitted, provided that the acts do not constitute defensive holding. 
SECTION 5 PASS INTERFERENCE 
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITION. It is pass interference by either team when any act by a player more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage significantly hinders an eligible player’s opportunity to catch the ball. Pass interference can only occur when a forward pass is thrown from behind the line of scrimmage, regardless of whether the pass is legal or illegal, or whether it crosses the line. When the ball is in the air, eligible offensive and defensive receivers have the same right to the path of the ball and are subject to the same restrictions. 
Acts that do not occur more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage are not pass interference, but could be offensive or defensive holding (see 12-1-3 and 12-1-6). 
Defensive pass interference rules apply from the time the ball is thrown until the ball is touched. See Article 2 for prohibited acts while the ball is in the air. 
Offensive pass interference rules apply from the time the ball is snapped until the ball is touched. See Article 2 for prohibited acts while the ball is in the air and Article 4 for prohibited acts prior to the pass. 
ARTICLE 2. PROHIBITED ACTS BY BOTH TEAMS WHILE THE BALL IS IN THE AIR. Acts that are pass interference include, but are not limited to: (a) Contact by a player who is not playing the ball that restricts the opponent’s opportunity to make the catch; (b) Playing through the back of an opponent in an attempt to make a play on the ball; 
(c) Grabbing an opponent’s arm(s) in such a manner that restricts his opportunity to catch a pass; (d) Extending an arm across the body of an opponent, thus restricting his ability to catch a pass, and regardless of whether the 
player committing such act is playing the ball; (e) Cutting off the path of an opponent by making contact with him, without playing the ball; (f) Hooking an opponent in an attempt to get to the ball in such a manner that it causes the opponent’s body to turn prior to the 
ball arriving; or (g) Initiating contact with an opponent by shoving or pushing off, thus creating separation. 
Note: If there is any question whether player contact is incidental, the ruling should be no interference. 
ARTICLE 3. PERMISSIBLE ACTS BY BOTH TEAMS WHILE THE BALL IS IN THE AIR. Acts that are permissible by a player include, but are not limited to: 
	.	(a)  Incidental contact by an opponent’s hands, arms, or body when both players are competing for the ball, or neither player is  looking for the ball. If there is any question whether contact is incidental, the ruling shall be no interference;  
	.	(b)  Inadvertent tangling of feet when both players are playing the ball or neither player is playing the ball;  
	.	(c)  Contact that would normally be considered pass interference, but the pass is clearly uncatchable by the involved players,  except as specified in 8-3-2 and 8-5-4 pertaining to blocking downfield by the offense;  
	.	(d)  Laying a hand on an opponent that does not restrict him in an attempt to make a play on the ball;  
	.	(e)  Contact by a player who has gained position on an opponent in an attempt to catch the ball; or  
	.	(f)  When a team presents an apparent punting formation and before the ball is kicked, acts that normally constitute pass  interference against the end man on the line of scrimmage or against an eligible receiver behind the line of scrimmage, who is aligned or in motion more than one yard outside the end man on the line. Defensive holding and offensive pass interference rules still apply.  
ARTICLE 4. OTHER PROHIBITED ACTS BY THE OFFENSE. Acts that are pass interference include: 
	.	(a)  Blocking more than one yard beyond the line of scrimmage by an offensive player prior to a pass being thrown. See 8-3-1-  Note for exception for an ineligible offensive player; or  
	.	(b)  Blocking a defender beyond the line while the pass is in the air if the block occurs in the vicinity of the player to whom the  pass is thrown. See 8-3-1-Note for exception for ineligible players.  
Penalty: For pass interference by the defense: First down for the offensive team at the spot of the foul. If the interference is also a personal foul (12-2), the 15-yard penalty for such a foul is also enforced, either from the spot of the foul (for interference), or from the end of the run if the foul for pass interference is declined. If the interference is behind the defensive goal line, it is first down for the offensive team on the defense’s one-yard line, or, if the previous spot was inside the two-yard line, halfway between the previous spot and the goal line. 
Penalty: For pass interference by the offense: Loss of 10 yards from the previous spot. 
SECTION 6 ENFORCEMENT SPOT 
ARTICLE 1. ENFORCEMENT SPOT. If there is a foul by either team from the time of the snap until a forward pass thrown from behind the line ends, the penalty is enforced from the previous spot. A pass play ends and a running play begins at the instant that a pass is caught. 
Exceptions: 
(a) Pass interference by the defense is enforced from the spot of the foul. If it occurs in the fouling team’s end zone, the ball will be placed at the one-yard line, or half the distance to the goal line from the previous spot, whichever is more beneficial to the offense. 
(b) Intentional grounding is a loss of down at the spot of the foul, or a loss of down and a 10-yard penalty from the previous spot, whichever is less beneficial for the offense. See 8-2-1-Penalty. 
32 
(c) If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the defense prior to completion of a forward pass thrown from behind the line, enforcement is from the previous spot or the dead ball spot, whichever is more beneficial to the offense. If the play results in a score for the offense, enforcement is on the ensuing kickoff or Try. If the passing team is fouled and subsequently loses possession after a completion, the passing team retains possession of the ball, and enforcement is from the previous spot. 
	.	(d)  If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense prior to an interception of a forward pass thrown from behind the line, enforcement is from the dead ball spot. If the intercepting team subsequently loses possession, the penalty is enforced from the spot of the interception, and the intercepting team retains possession.  
	.	(e)  It is a safety when the offensive team commits a foul behind its own goal line if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.  
SECTION 7 BACKWARD PASS AND FUMBLE 
ARTICLE 1. BACKWARD PASS. A runner may throw a backward pass at any time (3-22-5). Players of either team may advance after catching a backward pass, or recovering a backward pass after it touches the ground. Any snap from center is a backward pass. 
Exception: See actions to conserve time (4-7-1). 
ARTICLE 2. BACKWARD PASS OUT OF BOUNDS. If a backward pass goes out of bounds between the goal lines, the ball is dead (7-6-2-a), and it is next put in play at the inbounds spot. Rule 11 governs if a backward pass is declared dead behind the goal line. 
ARTICLE 3. FUMBLE. A fumble is any act, other than a pass or kick, which results in a loss of player possession. Exception: If a runner intentionally fumbles forward, it is a forward pass (3-2-5-Note). 
Item 1. Recovery and Advance. Any player of either team may recover or catch a fumble and advance, either before or after the ball strikes the ground, unless the fumble occurs on fourth down (See 8-7-5 below) or after the two-minute warning (See 8-7-6 below). 
Item 2. Legal Recovery. For a legal recovery of a fumble, see 3-2-7. 
Item 3. Out of Bounds. When a fumble goes out of bounds between the goal lines, the following shall apply: 
	.	(a)  If a fumble goes backward and out of bounds, the ball is next put in play at the inbounds spot by the team that was last in  possession;  
	.	(b)  If a fumble goes forward and out of bounds, the ball is next put in play at the spot of the fumble by the team that was last in  possession;  
	.	(c)  If a ball is fumbled in a team’s own end zone and goes forward into the field of play and out of bounds, it will result in a safety,  if that team provided the impetus that put the ball into the end zone (See 11-5-1 for exception for momentum). If the impetus  was provided by the opponent, the play will result in a touchback; or  
	.	(d)  Notwithstanding any of the above, when there has not been a change of possession during the down, and the spot of the ball  is not at or beyond the line to gain after fourth down, the ball is awarded to Team B at the spot that the ball is declared dead.  
Item 4. Out of Bounds in End Zone. When a fumble goes out of bounds in the end zone, the following shall apply: 
	.	(a)  If a ball is fumbled in the field of play, and goes forward into the opponent’s end zone and over the end line or sideline, a  touchback is awarded to the defensive team; or  
	.	(b)  If a ball is fumbled in a team’s own end zone or in the field of play and goes out of bounds in the end zone, it is a safety, if  that team provided the impetus that sent the ball into the end zone (See 11-5-1 for exception for momentum). If the impetus was provided by the opponent, it is a touchback.  
ARTICLE 4. HANDING BALL FORWARD. No player may hand the ball forward except to an eligible receiver who is behind the line of scrimmage. 
	.	(a)  Loss of player possession by unsuccessful execution of attempted handing is a fumble charged to the player that last had  possession.  
	.	(b)  A muffed handoff (legal or illegal) is a fumble, and the ball remains alive.  
Penalties: (a) For handing ball forward beyond the line of scrimmage: Loss of down and five yards from spot of the foul. (b) For handing ball forward to an ineligible receiver behind the line of scrimmage: Loss of down and five yards 
from the previous spot. (c) For handing ball forward after a change of possession: Loss of five yards from the spot of the foul. 
ARTICLE 5. FOURTH DOWN FUMBLE. If a fourth down fumble occurs during a play from scrimmage: (a) The ball may be advanced by any member of the defensive team. (b) The player who fumbled is the only Team A player permitted to recover and advance the ball prior to a change of possession. (c) If, prior to a change of a possession, the recovery or catch is by a teammate of the player who fumbled, the ball is dead, and 
the spot of the next snap is the spot of the fumble, or the spot of the recovery if the spot of the recovery is behind the spot of the fumble. 
ARTICLE 6. FUMBLE AFTER TWO-MINUTE WARNING OR DURING A TRY. If a fumble by either team occurs after the two- minute warning or during a Try: (a) The ball may be advanced by any opponent. (b) The player who fumbled is the only player of his team who is permitted to recover and advance the ball. 
33 
(c) If the recovery or catch is by a teammate of the player who fumbled, the ball is dead, and the spot of the next snap is the spot of the fumble, or the spot of the recovery if the spot of the recovery is behind the spot of the fumble. 
ARTICLE 7. ENFORCEMENT SPOT DURING A BACKWARD PASS OR FUMBLE. 
	.	(a)  When the spot of the backward pass or fumble is beyond the line of scrimmage, or when there is not a line of scrimmage, and there is a foul during the backward pass or fumble, the basic spot is the spot of the backward pass or the spot of the fumble. The three-and-one method of enforcement is used. See 14-3-6.  
	.	(b)  When the spot of a backward pass or fumble is behind the line of scrimmage, all fouls committed by either team, including a foul by Team B in Team A’s end zone, are enforced from the previous spot, except a foul by the offense in its end zone is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.  
	.	(c)  For enforcement when the offense commits a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul prior to the recovery by the defense of a backward pass or fumble. See 14-4-3. Note: When Team B gains possession in its end zone, and the impetus was by Team A, if Team B fumbles or throws a backward pass in the end zone, and fouls while the ball is loose, the spot of the fumble or the backward pass is considered to be the B20-yard line.  
34 
RULE 9 SCRIMMAGE KICK 
SECTION 1 KICK FROM SCRIMMAGE 
ARTICLE 1. KICK ON OR BEHIND LINE OF SCRIMMAGE. Team A may attempt a punt, drop kick, or placekick from on or behind the line of scrimmage. A kick is beyond the line of scrimmage if the kicker’s entire body and the ball are beyond the line of scrimmage when the ball is kicked. 
Penalty: For a punt, drop kick, or placekick that is kicked beyond the line of scrimmage or not from scrimmage: Loss of down and five yards from the spot of the kick. For a second kick from behind the line after the ball has crossed the line: Loss of down and five yards from the previous spot. 
Notes: 
(1) This is not considered illegally kicking the ball. (2) A second kick from behind the line of scrimmage is legal provided the ball has not crossed the line and returned behind 
the line. (3) Scrimmage kick rules apply to punts, drop kicks, and placekicks anywhere on the field. 
ARTICLE 2. KICKING TEAM PLAYERS ON LINE DURING KICK. During a kick from scrimmage, only the end men (eligible receivers) on the line of scrimmage at the time of the snap, or an eligible receiver who is aligned or in motion behind the line and is more than one yard outside the end man, are permitted to advance more than one yard beyond the line before the ball is kicked. 
Penalty: For ineligible player downfield before the ball is kicked: Loss of five yards. 
ARTICLE 3. DEFENSIVE TEAM FORMATION. Item 1. Punt Formation. When Team A presents a punt formation: (1) A Team B player, who is within one yard of the line of scrimmage, must have his entire body outside the snapper’s shoulder 
pads at the snap. 
Penalty: For illegal formation by the defense: Loss of five yards. 
(2) Team B players cannot push teammates into the offensive formation. 
Penalty: For pushing teammates into offensive formation: Loss of 15 yards. 
Note: The restriction in (1) above does not apply if a team does not present a standard punt formation (an equal number of players on either side of the snapper in a tight formation, and one player split out wide to either side), or if, after the offensive team has assumed a set position, there is a shift, or a player goes in motion. 
Item 2: Field Goal or Try Kick Formation. When Team A presents a field goal or Try Kick formation: 
	.	(1)  A Team B player, who is within one yard of the line of scrimmage, must have his entire body outside the snapper’s shoulder  pads at the snap.  
	.	(2)  No more than six Team B players may be on the line of scrimmage on either side of the snapper at the snap.  
Penalty: For illegal formation by the defense: Loss of five yards. (3) Team B players cannot push teammates into the offensive formation. Penalty: For pushing teammates into offensive formation: Loss of 15 yards. 
Note: The restrictions in (1) and (2) above do not apply if a team does not present a standard field goal or Try Kick formation (an equal number of players on either side of the snapper in a tight formation), or if, after the offensive team has assumed a set position, there is a shift, or a player goes in motion. 
ARTICLE 4. BLOCKING DURING KICK. The following blocking rules apply during a scrimmage kick down: 
	.	(a)  All players on the receiving team are prohibited from blocking below the waist during a down in which there is a scrimmage  kick.  
	.	(b)  A player on the receiving team may not go out of bounds and block a member of the kicking team who is out of bounds (12-  2-8-c).  
	.	(c)  Prior to the ball being kicked, the kicking team is subject to the blocking restrictions applicable to the offense, and the receiving  team is subject to the blocking restrictions applicable to the defense, except that a kicking team player may use his hands to  ward off, push, or pull aside a receiver who is legally or illegally attempting to obstruct his attempt to proceed downfield.  
	.	(d)  After the ball is kicked and goes beyond the line of scrimmage, and until the kick ends (either team secures possession of the ball, or the ball is dead by rule), the kicking team is subject to the blocking restrictions of the defense, and the receiving team is subject to the blocking restrictions of the offense. (For the exception prohibiting a block in the back by the kicking team while the ball is in flight, see 12-1-3-b). After the kick ends, both teams are subject to the normal restrictions applicable to  offense and defense.  Exception: If the ball does not go beyond the line of scrimmage, or goes beyond the line of scrimmage and returns behind the line untouched by the receiving team beyond the line, the blocking restrictions do not change, and the kicking team continues to be subject to the blocking restrictions of the offense and the receiving team to the blocking restrictions of the defense.  
	.	(e)  After the ball has been kicked and goes beyond the line of scrimmage, and until the kick ends (either team secures possession of the ball, or the ball is dead by rule), the penalty yardage for holding and illegal use of hands fouls by either team shall be 10 yards.  
35 
ARTICLE 5. KICKING TEAM PLAYER VOLUNTARILY OUT OF BOUNDS. During a scrimmage kick that crosses the line of scrimmage, and prior to the end of the kick, it is a foul if a kicking team player goes out of bounds voluntarily (without being contacted by a receiving team player) to avoid a block by a receiving team player. 
Penalty: For a kicking team player voluntarily going out of bounds on a scrimmage kick: Loss of five yards. 
If a member of the kicking team is forced out of bounds, or goes out of bounds voluntarily, and does not attempt to return inbounds in a reasonable amount of time, it is a foul for unsportsmanlike conduct. (12-3-1-u) 
SECTION 2 TOUCHING A SCRIMMAGE KICK 
ARTICLE 1. TOUCHING BEHIND THE LINE. Any touching of the ball behind the line of scrimmage by a kicking team player is legal, even if the ball has crossed the line and returns behind the line. 
ARTICLE 2. FIRST TOUCHING BEYOND THE LINE. “First touching” is when a player of the kicking team touches a scrimmage kick in the field of play that is beyond the line of scrimmage before it has been touched by a player of the receiving team beyond the line. If the ball is first touched by a player of the kicking team, it remains in play. First touching is a violation, and the receivers shall have the option of taking possession of the ball at the spot of first touching, provided no live ball penalty is accepted on the play, or at the spot where the ball is dead. First touching does not offset a foul by the receivers; if there is a live ball foul by the receivers that is enforced, either before or after the first touching violation, or any changes of possession, the violation is disregarded, and the penalty is enforced as customary. 
Notes: 
(1) If the receiving team gains possession, subsequently loses possession, and fouls after the kicking team gains possession, the spot of first touching is disregarded, and the kicking team retains possession. Enforcement of the receiving team’s foul is as customary. 
	.	(2)  There may be multiple “first touch” spots if the kicking team touches the ball multiple times before it is touched by a player of the receiving team.  
	.	(3)  A Team B player is deemed not to have touched a kick if such touching occurs in the immediate vicinity of the line in an attempt to block the kick.  
	.	(4)  If a player of the kicking team touches the goal line with any part of his body while touching the ball, the ball is dead, and the result of the play is a touchback.  
	.	(5)  The spot of first touching is normally the yard line at which the ball is when touched. If the first touching occurs while the ball is in the air above or beyond the goal line, and prior to the ball touching the goal line or the ground beyond the goal line, the spot of first touching is deemed to be the spot from which the touching player left the field of play, but in no event inside the receiving team’s one-yard line.  
ARTICLE 3. KICKING TEAM PLAYER OUT OF BOUNDS. A player of the kicking team, who has gone out of bounds during the kick, either of his own volition or by being legally forced out of bounds, may not touch or recover a scrimmage kick beyond the line of scrimmage until it has been touched by a kicking team player who has not been out of bounds, or until it has been touched by a player of the receiving team beyond the line. If he touches or recovers the ball before he has re-established himself inbounds, the ball is out of bounds at the spot of the touch, and there is no foul. 
Penalty: For illegal touching of a scrimmage kick: Loss of five yards. If the illegal touching is inside the receiver’s five- yard line, in addition to the other specified options, the receiving team may elect to take a touchback. 
ARTICLE 4. BLOCKED INTO KICK. There is no distinction between a player touching a ball or being touched by it, but a player is not considered to have touched the ball if he is blocked into it by an opponent, provided he is in a passive position and not blocking. A player who is engaged with and blocking his opponent when he contacts the ball is deemed to have touched the ball. 
ARTICLE 5. BALL BATTED OR ILLEGALLY KICKED INTO OPPONENT. A receiving team player is deemed to have not touched the ball if it is batted or illegally kicked into him by an opponent. Such touching by the receiving team is disregarded, though the bat or kick could create a first touching violation or a foul for an illegal bat or illegal kick. 
SECTION 3 CATCH OR RECOVERY OF A SCRIMMAGE KICK 
ARTICLE 1. KICKERS CATCH OR RECOVER BEHIND LINE. When a scrimmage kick is caught or recovered by the kicking team behind the line of scrimmage, the kicking team may advance, even if the ball has crossed the line and returned behind the line. (3-25-4) 
Item 1. Same Series of Downs. If the ball has returned behind the line untouched by the receiving team beyond the line, and the kicking team catches or recovers the ball, the existing series of downs continues unless the kicking team advances the ball to the line to gain, in which case there is a new series of downs. 
Item 2. New Series of Downs. If the ball has returned behind the line after being touched by the receiving team beyond the line, and the kicking team catches or recovers the ball, by rule there has been a change of possession, and the kicking team will be awarded a new series of downs. 
ARTICLE 2. KICKERS CATCH OR RECOVER BEYOND LINE. When the kickers catch or recover a kick beyond the line of scrimmage, the ball is dead at the spot of recovery, even if a member of the receiving team has first touched the ball. 
Item 1. Legal Catch or Recovery. If the receiving team touches the ball beyond the line, a subsequent catch or recovery by the kicking team is legal, but the ball is dead. In the event of such a catch or recovery, it is first-and-10 for the kickers, or if the ball is caught or recovered by the kickers in the receiver’s end zone, it is a touchdown for the kickers. (7-3-1-d) 
Item 2. Illegal Catch or Recovery. If the kickers catch or recover a kick beyond the line that has not been touched beyond the 36 
line by the receiving team, the ball is dead, and it is first-and-10 for the receivers at the spot of catch or recovery (see 11-4-2 for missed field goals). If a kick from behind the line is touched by the receiving team behind the line, such touching does not make the kicking team eligible to catch or recover the kick beyond the line. 
Item 3. Touchback. If a player of the kicking team illegally catches or recovers a scrimmage kick, other than a field goal attempt from beyond the 20-yard line, and touches the goal line with any part of his body while in possession of the ball, the ball is dead, and the result of the play is a touchback. For a missed field goal from beyond the 20-yard line, see 11-4-2. 
ARTICLE 3. RECEIVERS CATCH OR RECOVERY. If the receivers catch or recover any kick, they may advance. For fair catch exception, see 10-2. For exception for a ball that has crossed the goal line, see 9-4-1. 
ARTICLE 4. SIMULTANEOUS CATCH OR RECOVERY. When a legal kick is simultaneously caught or recovered anywhere by two eligible opposing players, or if the ball is lying on the field of play with no player attempting to recover it, it is awarded to the receivers. (7-2-1-i) 
SECTION 4 BALL CROSSES GOAL LINE, TOUCHES GOAL POSTS, OUT OF BOUNDS, DEAD IN FIELD OF PLAY 
ARTICLE 1. BALL CROSSES RECEIVERS’ GOAL LINE. If a scrimmage kick crosses the receiver’s goal line from the impetus of the kick, the following shall apply: 
	.	(a)  If the ball has not been touched by a player of the receiving team beyond the line of scrimmage, it is dead immediately, and  the result of the play is a touchback, when: (1) it touches the ground on or behind the receiver’s goal line; (2) it touches a player of the kicking team who is touching the ground on or behind the receiver’s goal line; or (3) it touches a player of the kicking team who has touched the ground on or behind the receiver’s goal line and has not re-  established himself in the field of play. See 11-4-2 for options for missed field goals beyond the 20-yard line.  
	.	(b)  If the receivers catch the ball in the end zone, or recover it in the end zone after touching it in the field of play or the end zone,  they may advance.  
	.	(c)  If the kickers catch or recover the ball in the end zone after the receivers first touch the ball in the field of play or the end zone,  it is a touchdown for the kickers.  
	.	(d)  If there is a spot of first touching by the kickers outside the receivers’ 20-yard line, the receiving team has the option to take  possession of the ball at the spot of the first touching.  
	.	(e)  If the scrimmage kick is a punt, and the ball goes out of bounds in the field of play after being touched by a receiver in the  end zone or in the field of play, it is the receiving team’s ball at the out of bounds spot.  
ARTICLE 2. KICK TOUCHES RECEIVERS’ GOAL POSTS. If a missed field goal or Try, or a punt, has touched the receiver’s goal post, uprights, or crossbar, the ball is dead in the receiver’s end zone, and all customary rules pertaining to punts, missed field goals, and Trys apply. 
ARTICLE 3. KICK TOUCHES KICKERS’ GOAL POSTS. If a scrimmage kick touches the kickers’ goal post, uprights, or crossbar, the ball is dead, and it is a safety. See 11-5-1. 
ARTICLE 4. BALL OUT OF BOUNDS OR NOT RECOVERED IN FIELD OF PLAY. If a scrimmage kick goes out of bounds between the goal lines or is lying in the field of play with no player attempting to recover it, it is the receiver’s ball at the dead ball spot, unless the special rules for missed field goals in 11-4-2 apply. 
SECTION 5 SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE 1. SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT. If there is a foul from the time of the snap until a legal scrimmage kick ends, enforcement is from the previous spot. This includes a foul during a run prior to a legal kick, and a foul by the kicking team during a missed field goal attempt. 
Exceptions: 
	.	(1)  If the offensive team commits a foul in its own end zone, it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.  
	.	(2)  Unless the kick is a missed field goal attempt, if there is a foul by the kicking team, and the receiving team retains possession throughout the down, the receiving team will have the option of taking the penalty at the previous spot and replaying the down, or adding the penalty yardage on to the dead ball spot.  Notes:  (a) The dead ball spot for scrimmage kicks that result in a touchback is the 20-yard line. (b) If there is a foul for an illegal touch inside the five-yard line, the receiving team also has the option of accepting a  touchback. (c) If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the kicking team during a missed field goal attempt  where the receiving team is awarded the ball (see 11-4-2), enforcement is from the succeeding spot.  
	.	(3)  Penalties for fair catch interference, interference with an opportunity to make a catch, an invalid fair catch signal, or a personal foul (blocking) after a fair catch signal are enforced from the spot of the foul. If the personal foul is not part of a double foul and the opponent has possession at the end of the down, it may be enforced from the dead ball spot. See 14-2-4.  
	.	(4)  Except for fouls that are committed in an attempt to block the kick (such as running into or roughing the kicker, defensive holding (pull-and-shoot), leverage, leaping, and pushing teammate(s) into the offensive formation), if the receiving team commits a foul after the kick crosses the line of scrimmage, the penalty for its infraction will be enforced as if it had been in possession of the ball at the time the foul occurred (a post-possession foul), provided that the receiving team does not lose possession of the ball at any time during the down. The penalty shall be enforced from whichever of the following spots is least beneficial to the receiving team:  
37 
(a) the end of the kick; or (b) the spot of the foul. 
If the foul occurs in the end zone, it is deemed to have occurred at the 20-yard line, unless enforcement results in a safety (14-4-4). 
(5) For enforcement of a personal or unsportsmanlike conduct foul on a play that results in a score, see 14-2-3; for an illegal bat, see 12-5-1; and for illegally kicking a loose ball, see 12-5-2. 
When Team B establishes possession of the ball, a scrimmage kick ends, and a running play begins, and fouls that occur thereafter are enforced from the dead ball spot or the spot of the foul (three-and-one method, 14-3-6). 
38 
RULE 10 OPPORTUNITY TO CATCH A KICK, FAIR CATCH 
SECTION 1 OPPORTUNITY TO CATCH A KICK 
ARTICLE 1. INTERFERENCE. During a scrimmage kick that crosses the line of scrimmage, or during a free kick, members of the kicking team are prohibited from interfering with any receiver making an attempt to catch the airborne kick, or from obstructing or hindering his path to the airborne kick, regardless of whether any signal was given. 
Item 1. Contact with Receiver. It is interference if a player of the kicking team contacts the receiver, or causes a passive player of either team to contact the receiver, before or simultaneous to the receiver touching the ball. It is not a foul if a kicking team player is blocked into the receiver or the contact is the result of a foul. 
Item 2. Right of Way. A receiver who is moving toward a kicked ball that is in flight has the right of way. If opponents obstruct his path to the ball, or cause a passive player of either team to obstruct his path, it is interference, even if there is no contact, or if he catches the ball in spite of the interference, and regardless of whether any signal was given. 
Penalties: 
	.	(a)  For interference with the opportunity to make a catch when a prior signal has not been made: Loss of 15 yards from  the spot of the foul, and the offended team is entitled to put the ball in play by a snap from scrimmage. If such interference is a personal foul for unnecessary roughness, the 15-yard penalty will be enforced from the spot of the foul or the previous spot.  
	.	(b)  For interfering with a fair catch after a signal: Loss of 15 yards from the spot of the foul. A fair catch is awarded even if the ball is not caught. If such interference is a personal foul for unnecessary roughness, the 15-yard penalty will be enforced from the spot of the foul or the previous spot.  Note: If the foul is not part of a double foul and the opponent has possession at the end of the down, the foul may be enforced from the dead ball spot. See 14-2-4.  
SECTION 2 FAIR CATCH 
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITION. A fair catch is an unhindered catch of a scrimmage kick that has crossed the line of scrimmage and has not touched the ground, or of a free kick that has not touched the ground, by a player of the receiving team who has given a valid fair catch signal. 
ARTICLE 2. FAIR CATCH SIGNAL. Item 1. Valid Fair Catch Signal. A fair catch signal is valid if it is made while the kick is in flight by a player who fully extends one arm above his helmet and waves it from side to side. A receiver is permitted to legally raise his hand(s) to his helmet to shield his eyes from the sun, but is not permitted to raise them above his helmet except to signal for a fair catch. 
Item 2. Invalid Fair Catch Signal. If a player raises his hand(s) above his shoulder(s) in any other manner, it is an invalid fair catch signal. If there is an invalid fair catch signal, the ball is dead when caught or recovered by any player of the receiving team, but it is not a fair catch. (The ball is not dead if it touches an opponent before or after it strikes the ground. See Article 3-b). A signal given behind the line of scrimmage is ignored. 
Penalty: For an invalid fair catch signal: Loss of five yards from the spot of the signal. If the foul occurs in Team B’s end zone during a free kick, it is enforced from the previous spot. 
Item 3. Muff. After a valid fair catch signal, the opportunity to catch a kick does not end if the ball is muffed. A player who signaled for a fair catch must have a reasonable opportunity to catch the muffed ball before it hits the ground without interference by members of the kicking team, and regardless of whether the ball strikes another player or an official. 
Penalty: For interference with the opportunity to make a fair catch after a muff: A fair catch is awarded at the spot of the interference even if the ball is not caught. If such interference is a personal foul for unnecessary roughness, a 15-yard penalty will be enforced from the spot of the foul or the previous spot. 
Item 4. Intentional Muff. An intentional muff forward prior to a catch is an illegal bat (see 12-5-1). Item 5. Illegal Block. Until the ball touches a teammate or an opponent, a player who makes a valid or invalid fair catch signal is 
prohibited from blocking or initiating contact with a player of the kicking team. 
Penalty: For an illegal block after a fair catch signal: Loss of 15 yards from the spot of the foul. If the foul occurs in Team B’s end zone during a free kick, it is enforced from the previous spot. 
ARTICLE 3. RESTRICTIONS. 
	.	(a)  If a player of the receiving team makes a valid fair catch signal, and the ball is not touched by a player of the kicking team,  the following apply: 
	.	(1)  If he catches the ball, it is dead immediately, and it is a fair catch. If he muffs the ball, but catches it before it touches the  ground, it is also a fair catch.  
	.	(2)  If he recovers the ball after it strikes the ground, it is dead immediately, but it is not a fair catch.  
	.	(3)  If the ball is caught or recovered by a teammate who did not make a valid fair catch signal, the ball is dead immediately,  but it is not a fair catch.  
	.	(b)  If the ball touches a player of the kicking team, before or after it strikes the ground, any player of the receiving team may catch  or recover it and advance. If a player of the receiving team who has given a valid fair catch signal catches the ball before it  hits the ground and elects not to advance the ball, it is a fair catch.  
	.	(c)  If a receiver has made a fair catch, an opponent is prohibited from blocking or tackling him, or causing a passive player of  either team to contact him. Incidental contact is not a foul.  
39 
Penalty: For illegal contact with a player who has made a fair catch: Loss of 15 yards from the dead ball spot and disqualification if flagrant. 
ARTICLE 4. PUTTING BALL IN PLAY AFTER FAIR CATCH. After a fair catch is made, or is awarded as the result of fair catch interference, the receiving team has the option of putting the ball in play by a: 
	.	(a)  fair catch kick (drop kick or placekick without a tee) from the spot of the catch (or the succeeding spot after enforcement of  any applicable penalties) (3-10 and 11-4-3);  
	.	(b)  snap from the spot of the catch (or the succeeding spot after enforcement of any applicable penalties); or  
	.	(c)  snap or fair catch kick from the receiving team’s 25-yard line (or the succeeding spot after enforcement of any applicable  penalties) if the catch is behind its 25-yard line on a free kick.  Note: A receiver may make or be awarded a fair catch in his end zone. If there is fair catch interference or illegal contact with the receiver after he has made a fair catch, the 15-yard penalty is enforced from the receiver’s 20 or 25-yard line as applicable, and the option for a fair catch kick is awarded.  
ARTICLE 5. EXTENSION OF A PERIOD. If time expires during a play in which a player has signaled for a fair catch, the following shall apply: 
	.	(a)  If the player makes a fair catch, the receiving team may elect to extend the period with a fair catch kick, but does not have  the option to extend the period by a snap from scrimmage.  
	.	(b)  If the kicking team interferes with a receiver who has signaled for a fair catch, the receiving team will have the option to extend  the period by attempting a fair catch kick or by a snap from scrimmage after enforcement of any applicable penalties.  
40 
RULE 11 SCORING 
SECTION 1 VALUE OF SCORES 
ARTICLE 1. WINNING TEAM. The team that scores the greater number of points during the entire game is the winner. If a team forfeits a game, the opponent will be declared the winner by a score of 2-0, but the points will not be added to the winning team’s record for purposes of offensive production or tie-breakers. 
ARTICLE 2. TYPES OF SCORING PLAYS. Points are scored as follows: (a) Touchdown: 6 points (b) Field goal: 3 points (c) Safety: 2 points 
(d) Try after touchdown: 1 point (field goal or safety) or 2 points (touchdown) 
SECTION 2 TOUCHDOWN 
ARTICLE 1. TOUCHDOWN PLAYS. A touchdown is scored and the ball becomes dead when: 
	.	(a)  the ball is on, above, or behind the plane of the opponent’s goal line (extended) and is in possession of a runner who has  advanced from the field of play into the end zone  
	.	(b)  a ball in possession of an airborne runner is on, above, or behind the plane of the goal line, and some part of the ball passed  over or inside the pylon  
	.	(c)  a ball in player possession touches the pylon, provided that, after contact by an opponent, no part of the player’s body, except  his hands or feet, struck the ground before the ball touched the pylon  
	.	(d)  any player who is legally inbounds secures possession of a loose ball that is on, above, or behind the opponent’s goal line  (3-2-4 and 3-2-7)  
	.	(e)  the Referee awards a touchdown to a team that has been denied one by a palpably unfair act  
SECTION 3 TRY 
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL RULES. After a touchdown, a Try is an opportunity for either team to score one or two additional points during one scrimmage down subject to 4-8-2-c and 16-1-3-a. 
The Try begins when the Referee sounds the whistle for play to start. The game clock will not run during the Try. The team that scored the touchdown shall put the ball in play: (a) anywhere on or between the inbound lines; (b) 15 yards from the defensive team’s goal line for a Try kick; or 
(c) two yards from the defensive team’s goal line for a Try by pass or run. After the ball has been declared ready for play, the offensive team may: 
	.	(a)  Change its choice of (b) or (c) above if there is a penalty or if there is a charged team timeout by either team; or  
	.	(b)  Change the location of the ball by calling a timeout.  
ARTICLE 2. RESULTS OF A TRY. During a Try, the following shall apply: 
	.	(a)  If a kick results in a field goal by the offense, one point is awarded. An artificial or manufactured tee shall not be permitted to  assist in the execution of a Try kick. (The conditions of 11-4-1 must be met).  
	.	(b)  If a Try results in a touchdown by either team, two points are awarded.  
	.	(c)  If the Try results in what would ordinarily be a safety against either team, one point is awarded to the opponent.  
	.	(d)  If any play results in a touchback, the Try is unsuccessful, and there shall be no replay.  
	.	(e)  The Try ends when:  (1) either team scores; (2) the ball is dead by rule; or (3) a fumble by either team is recovered by a teammate of the fumbling player.  
ARTICLE 3. FOULS COMMITTED DURING TRY. 
If a foul results in a re-Try, Team A will have the option to enforce the penalty from the spot where it attempted the Try (previous spot) or from the yard line for the other Try option, the location of which is determined by any previously enforced penalty, if applicable. 
Exception: Defensive pass interference is a spot foul. If the foul is in the end zone, the ball will be placed on the defense’s one- yard line, or half the distance to the goal, whichever is more advantageous to Team A. In addition, Team A may have the penalty enforced half the distance from the other Try spot. 
Item 1. Fouls Before the Signal. If there is a foul by either team after a touchdown and before the ready for play signal, it is enforced on the next kickoff or the Try. 
Item 2. Fouls Before the Snap. If there is a foul by either team which causes a play to be whistled dead prior to the snap, it shall be treated the same as if it had occurred prior to a scrimmage play. If a foul by the defense prevents the attempt of a Try, the offensive team has the option to have the distance penalty assessed on the next Try or on the ensuing kickoff. 
Item 3. Fouls by Team A. The following applies if there is a foul by Team A: (a) If the foul is during a successful Try, the Try shall be repeated, unless the penalty results in a loss of down. (b) If the penalty for a foul results in a loss of down, the Try is unsuccessful, and there shall be no replay. (c) All fouls committed after a change of possession will result in a distance penalty being assessed on the ensuing kickoff, 
provided the penalty does not offset with another penalty or negate a successful Try. 
41 
	.	(d)  All personal or unsportsmanlike conduct fouls will result in a distance penalty being assessed on the ensuing kickoff, provided the penalty does not offset with another penalty or negate a successful Try.  
	.	(e)  If the foul results in a safety, Team B is awarded one point.  
Item 4. Fouls by Team B. The following applies if there is a foul by Team B: (a) All fouls, except for defensive pass interference, will result in the distance penalty being assessed on the ensuing kickoff, 
provided the penalty does not offset with another penalty, create a re-Try, or negate a score by Team B. 
	.	(b)  If the foul results in a safety, Team A is awarded one point.  
	.	(c)  If the foul is during an unsuccessful try, Team A may decline the distance penalty, and the down is replayed.  
Item 5. Fouls by Both Teams With No Change of Possession. If there are fouls by both teams during a Try in which there is not a change of possession, the Try must be replayed (14-5-1), unless the scoring team’s only foul is a dead ball foul after a score. 
Item 6. Fouls by Both Teams With Change of Possession. If both teams foul during a Try in which there is a change or changes of possession, the following shall apply: (a) If both teams foul before the first change of possession, the Try shall be repeated. (b) If Team B fouls before the first change of possession, the Try shall be repeated. 
(c) If Team A fouls before the first change of possession, the Try shall be deemed to have failed. (d) If neither team fouls before the first change of possession, and both teams subsequently commit fouls, the Try shall be 
deemed to have failed. 
Item 7. Fouls After a Try. If there is a foul by either team after a Try, it is enforced on the succeeding kickoff. If there are fouls by both teams, normal enforcement rules apply. 
ARTICLE 4. KICKOFF AFTER TRY. After a Try, the team on defense during the Try shall receive the kickoff (6-1-1-a). 
SECTION 4 FIELD GOAL 
ARTICLE 1. SUCCESSFUL FIELD GOAL. A field goal is scored when all of the following conditions are met: 
	.	(a)  The kick must be a placekick or dropkick made by the offense from on or behind the line of scrimmage or from the spot of a fair catch (fair catch kick). If a fair catch is made or awarded outside the inbound line, the spot of the kick is the nearest  inbound line.  
	.	(b)  After the ball is kicked, it must not touch the ground or any player of the offensive team before it passes through the goal.  
	.	(c)  The entire ball must pass through the vertical plane of the goal, which is the area above the crossbar and between the uprights  or, if above the uprights, between their outside edges. If the ball passes through the goal, and returns through the goal without striking the ground or some object or person beyond the goal, the attempt is unsuccessful.  
ARTICLE 2. MISSED FIELD GOALS. If there is a missed field goal attempt that crosses the line of scrimmage, and the ball has not been touched by the receivers beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play, or in the end zone before the ball has touched the ground in the end zone, the following shall apply: (a) If the spot of the kick was inside the receivers’ 20-yard line, it is the receivers’ ball at the 20-yard line or 
(b) If the spot of the kick was from the receivers’ 20-yard line or beyond the receivers’ 20-yard line, it is the receivers’ ball at the spot of the kick. 
Exceptions: 
The special rules pertaining to field goals in (a) and (b) are not applicable, and all general rules for a scrimmage kick, other than penalty enforcements, will apply when there is a missed field goal and: 
	.	(1)  the ball is touched by the receivers beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play or in the end zone before the ball  has become dead; or  
	.	(2)  the scrimmage kick ends behind the line of scrimmage, and the ball has not been touched by the receivers beyond the  line of scrimmage.  Note: If a foul occurs during an unsuccessful field goal attempt in (1) or (2) above, Rule 14-4-8 governs.  
SUPPLEMENTAL NOTES: 
	.	(1)  If the receivers do not touch the ball beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play or in the end zone, the ball is dead as soon as it touches the ground in the end zone, and it is the receivers’ ball at the spot of the kick, or at the 20-yard line if the attempt was from inside the 20-yard line.  
	.	(2)  If the ball goes out of bounds after it is first touched by the receivers beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play, it is the receivers’ ball at the out of bounds spot.  
	.	(3)  If the receivers first touch the ball beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play or in the end zone, and the kickers recover, the ball belongs to the kickers at the spot of recovery. If the recovery is in the end zone, it is a touchdown.  
	.	(4)  If the receivers first touch the ball beyond the line of scrimmage in the field of play, and without any new impetus, the ball  rolls into the end zone where it is declared dead in the possession of the receivers, it is a touchback.  
	.	(5)  For a successful field goal, or for an unsuccessful attempt that does not land in the field of play, the maximum amount of  time that can run off the game clock is five seconds.  
ARTICLE 3. FAIR CATCH KICK. The rules for a field goal attempt from scrimmage apply to a field goal attempt following a fair catch (a fair catch kick). 
Exceptions: 
(1) The fair catch kick line for the kicking team is the yard line through the most forward point from which the ball is kicked. (2) The fair catch kick line for the receiving team is the yard line 10 yards in advance of the kicking team’s fair catch kick 
line. 
42 
Note: Though a fair catch kick is not a free kick, the rules for a free kick formation apply (6-1-3). However, the kicking team cannot possess the ball unless it has first been touched by the receivers. 
ARTICLE 4. NO TEE. An artificial or manufactured tee shall not be permitted to assist in the execution of a field goal. 
ARTICLE 5. FOREIGN ARTICLES. No article of any type may be placed on the field, or used in any manner, to assist a player in the execution of a field goal and/or Try attempt. Nothing other than a hand or finger may be used to mark the spot or the vicinity of a kick or hold. 
ARTICLE 6. BALL NEXT IN PLAY. After a field goal, the team scored upon will receive the kickoff. See 6-1-1-a. 
SECTION 5 SAFETY 
ARTICLE 1. SAFETY. It is a safety: 
	.	(a)  when the offense commits a foul behind its own goal line and the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot. (see also  14-2-2-b) or;  
	.	(b)  when an impetus by a team sends the ball behind its own goal line, and the ball is dead in the end zone in its possession or  the ball is out of bounds behind the goal line.  Exceptions:  It is not a safety: (1) If a forward pass from behind the line of scrimmage is incomplete in the end zone. (2) If a defensive player, in the field of play, intercepts a pass or catches or recovers a fumble, backward pass, scrimmage  kick, free kick, or fair catch kick, and his original momentum carries him into his end zone where the ball is declared dead in his team’s possession. The ball belongs to the defensive team at the spot where the player’s foot or other body part touched the ground to establish possession. If that spot is in the end zone, the result of the play is a touchback, even if the ball is not on, above, or beyond the goal line. (11-6-1) 
	.	(a)  If a player of the team which intercepts, catches, or recovers the ball commits a live ball foul in the end zone, it is a safety.  
	.	(b)  If a player who intercepts, catches, or recovers the ball throws a completed or intercepted illegal forward pass from the end zone, the ball remains alive. If his opponent intercepts the illegal pass and scores, it is a touchdown.  
	.	(c)  If a player of the team which intercepts, catches, or recovers the ball commits a foul in the field of play, and the ball becomes dead in the end zone, the basic spot is the spot of the change of possession.  
	.	(d)  If the spot where possession changed is inside the one-yard line, the ball is to be spotted at the one-yard line.  
	.	Notes: 
	.	(1)  A ball in the end zone which is carried toward the field of play is still in the end zone until the entire ball is in the field of play (3-12-4).  
	.	(2)  The impetus is always attributed to the offense, unless the defense creates a new force that sends the ball behind its own goal line by muffing a ball which is at rest or nearly at rest, or by batting or kicking any loose ball (3-17).  
ARTICLE 2. BALL IN PLAY AFTER SAFETY. After a safety, the team scored upon must put the ball in play by a free kick (punt, dropkick, or placekick) from its 20-yard line, unless an extension exception applies (4-8-2-g). An artificial or manufactured tee cannot be used. See 6-1-1-b and 6-1-3. 
SECTION 6 TOUCHBACK 
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITION. It is a touchback if the ball is dead on or behind the goal line a team is defending, provided that the impetus comes from an opponent, and that it is not a touchdown or an incomplete forward pass. A ball in the end zone which is carried toward the field of play is still in the end zone until the entire ball is in the field of play (3-12-4). 
ARTICLE 2. TOUCHBACK SITUATIONS. When a team provides the impetus (3-17) that sends a loose ball behind its opponent’s goal line, it is a touchback: (a) if the ball is dead in the opponent’s possession in its end zone; (b) if the ball is out of bounds behind the goal line (see 8-7-3-Item 4-a); 
(c) if a scrimmage kick has not been touched by a player of the receiving team beyond the line of scrimmage, and the ball: (1) touches the ground on or behind the receiver’s goal line; (2) touches a player of the kicking team who is touching the ground on or behind the receiver’s goal line; or (3) touches a player of the kicking team who has touched the ground on or behind the receiver’s goal line and has not re- 
established himself in the field of play (see 11-4-2-b for exception for a missed field goal from beyond the 20-yard line). (d) if any legal or illegal kick touches the receivers’ goal posts, crossbar, or uprights, other than one which scores a field goal; (e) if the kickers interfere with the opportunity to catch an airborne kick or with a fair catch behind the receivers’ goal line (10-1 
and 10-2); or (f) if a player of the kicking team illegally catches or recovers a scrimmage kick in the field of play, and carries the ball across 
the goal line, or touches the goal line with any part of his body while in possession of the ball. For exception for a missed field goal from beyond the 20-yard line, see 11-4-2-b. 
Note: 
(1) If the impetus is a scrimmage kick, and there has been a spot of first touching by the kickers beyond the receivers’ 20- yard line, the receivers shall have the option of taking possession of the ball at the spot of first touching. 
ARTICLE 3. BALL NEXT IN PLAY. After a touchback, the team that has been awarded the touchback next snaps the ball at its 20-yard line from any point on or between the inbound lines, unless the touchback results from a free kick, in which case the ball shall be placed at the team’s 25-yard line. 
43 
RULE 12 PLAYER CONDUCT 
SECTION 1 BLOCKING, USE OF HANDS AND ARMS 
ARTICLE 1. LEGAL AND ILLEGAL BLOCK. A player of either team may block (obstruct or impede) an opponent at any time, provided that the act is not: (a) pass interference (see Rule 8, Section 5, Article 1); (b) illegal contact (see Rule 8, Section 4); 
(c) fair catch interference or interference with the opportunity to catch a kick (see Rule 10, Section 1); (d) clipping against a non-runner (see Section 2, Article 1); (e) a chop block (see Section 2, Article 5); (f) an illegal crackback block (see Section 2, Article 6); 
(g) an illegal low block during a free kick, a scrimmage kick, after a change of possession, or outside the Tight End Box (see Section 2, Article 4); 
(h) unnecessary roughness (see Section 2, Article 8); (i) roughing the passer (see Section 2, Article 11); (j) an illegal cut block (see Rule 8, Section 4, Article 5); (k) roughing the kicker or holder (see Section 2, Articles 12 and 13); (l) offensive (see Section 1, Article 3(c)) or defensive (Section 1, Article 6) holding; (m) illegal use of hands (see Section 1, Article 3-a); 
(n) an illegal block in the back above the waist (see Section 1, Article 3-b); (o) tripping (see Section 2, Article 14); (p) an illegal peel back block (see Section 2, Article 2); (q) an illegal blindside block (see Section 2, Article 7); 
(r) an illegal double team block (see Rule 6, Section 2, Article 1); or (s) an illegal wedge block (see Rule 6, Section 2, Article 1); 
Penalty: For illegal use of hands, arms, or body by the offense: Loss of 10 yards. 
ARTICLE 2. LEGAL BLOCK BY OFFENSIVE PLAYER. An offensive player is permitted to block an opponent by contacting him with his head, shoulders, hands, and/or outer surface of the forearm, or with any other part of his body that is not prohibited by another rule. 
A blocker may use his arms, or open or closed hands, to contact an opponent on or outside the opponent’s frame (the body of an opponent below the neck that is presented to the blocker), provided that he does not materially restrict him. The blocker must work immediately to bring his hands inside the opponent’s frame, and as the play develops, the blocker is permitted to work for and maintain his position against an opponent, provided that he does not illegally clip or illegally push from behind. 
An offensive player is permitted to use his hands or arms to restrict an opponent: 
	.	(a)  If he is a runner. A runner may ward off opponents with his hands and arms. He may also lay his hand on a teammate or  push him into an opponent, but he may not grasp or hold on to a teammate.  
	.	(b)  During a loose ball that has touched the ground. An offensive player may use his hands/arms legally to block or otherwise  push or pull an opponent out of the way in a personal attempt to recover the ball. See specific fumble, pass, or kick rules and  especially 6-2-1.  
	.	(c)  A kicking team player. See 6-2-1 and 9-1-4 for blocking restrictions during a kick.  
ARTICLE 3. ILLEGAL BLOCK BY OFFENSIVE PLAYER. It is a foul if an offensive blocker: (a) Thrusts his hands forward above the frame of an opponent to forcibly contact him on the head or neck in a direct or prolonged 
manner; or 
Penalty: For illegal use of hands by the offense: Loss of 10 yards. 
(b) Blocks an opponent (from behind) in the back above the opponent’s waist, or uses his hands or arms to push an opponent from behind in a manner that affects his movement, except in close-line play. This prohibition also applies to a player of the kicking team while the ball is in flight during a free kick or scrimmage kick. 
The use of hands on the back is not a foul when: (1) a player is making a personal attempt to recover a loose ball; (2) the opponent turns away from the blocker when contact is imminent; (3) both of the blocker’s hands are on the opponent’s side. (If either hand is on the back, it is a foul). 
Penalty: For an illegal block in the back above the waist by the offense: Loss of 10 yards. 
(c) Uses his hands or arms to materially restrict or alter the defender’s path or angle of pursuit. It is a foul regardless of whether the blocker’s hands are inside or outside the frame of the defender’s body. Material restrictions include but are not limited to: (1) grabbing or tackling an opponent; (2) hooking, jerking, twisting, or turning him; or 
(3) pulling him to the ground. 
Penalty: For holding by the offense: Loss of 10 yards. 
Blocking Notes: 
(1) When a defensive player is held by an offensive player during the following situations, Offensive holding will not be called: (a) if the runner is being tackled simultaneously by any defensive player; (b) if the runner simultaneously goes out of bounds; (c) if a fair catch is made simultaneously; 
44 
(d) if the action clearly occurs after a forward pass has been thrown to a receiver beyond the line of scrimmage; (e) if the action occurs away from the point of attack and not within close-line play; (f) if a free kick results in a touchback; (g) if a scrimmage kick simultaneously becomes a touchback; 
(h) if the action is part of a double team block, unless the defender splits the double team, gets to the outside of either blocker, or is taken to the ground; or 
(i) if, during a defensive charge, a defensive player uses a “rip” technique that puts an offensive player in a position that would normally be holding, unless and until the defender’s feet are taken away from him by the blocker’s action. 
	.	(2)  If a blocker falls on or pushes down a defender whose momentum is carrying him to the ground, Offensive holding will  not be called unless the blocker prevents the defender from rising from the ground.  
	.	(3)  If the official has not seen the entire action that sends a defender to the ground, Offensive holding will not be called.  
ARTICLE 4. ASSISTING THE RUNNER AND INTERLOCKING INTERFERENCE. No offensive player may: (a) pull a runner in any direction at any time; (b) use interlocking interference, by grasping a teammate or by using his hands or arms to encircle the body of a teammate in 
an effort to block an opponent; or (c) push or throw his body against a teammate to aid him in an attempt to obstruct an opponent or to recover a loose ball. 
Penalty: For assisting the runner, interlocking interference, or illegal use of hands, arms, or body by the offense: Loss of 10 yards. 
ARTICLE 5. LEGAL USE OF HANDS OR ARMS BY DEFENSE. A defensive player may use his hands, arms, or body to push, pull, or ward off offensive players: (a) when he is defending himself against an obstructing opponent while attempting to reach the runner; (b) when an opponent is obviously attempting to block him; 
(c) in a personal attempt to reach a loose ball that has touched the ground during a backward pass, fumble, or kick; (d) during a forward pass that has crossed the neutral zone and has been touched by any player; and 
Exceptions: (1) See 8-4-2, 8-4-3, and 8-4-7 for rules applicable to illegal contact with an eligible receiver. (2) See 8-4-5 and 12-2-3 for rules applicable for an illegal cut block against an eligible receiver. 
(e) during a kick. See 6-2-1 and 9-1-4 for blocking restrictions during a kick. 
ARTICLE 6. DEFENSIVE HOLDING. It is a foul for defensive holding if: (a) a defensive player tackles or holds any opponent other than a runner, except as permitted in Article 5. For this purpose, a 
player is considered a runner while in the pocket if a teammate pretends to give him the ball and/or he pretends to possess 
the ball. (b) during a punt, field goal attempt, or Try kick attempt, B1 grabs and pulls an offensive player out of the way, allowing B2 to 
shoot the gap (pull-and-shoot) in an attempt to block an apparent kick, except if B1 is advancing toward the kicker. 
Penalty: For defensive holding: Loss of five yards and an automatic first down. ARTICLE 7. ILLEGAL USE OF HANDS BY DEFENSE. It is a foul if a defensive player thrusts his hands or arms forward above 
the frame of an opponent to forcibly contact him on the head or neck in a direct or prolonged manner. 
Penalty: For illegal use of hands by the defense: Loss of five yards and an automatic first down. 
SECTION 2 PERSONAL FOULS 
ARTICLE 1. CLIPPING. There shall be no clipping against a non-runner. This does not apply to offensive blocking in close-line play where it is legal to clip above the knee(s), but it is illegal to clip at or below the knee(s). See 3-7, close-line play. 
Exception: An offensive lineman may not clip a defender above the knees who, at the snap, is aligned on the line of scrimmage opposite another offensive lineman who is more than one position away, and the defender is responding to the flow of the ball away from the blocker. Example: An offensive tackle cannot clip a defensive nose tackle on a sweep away. 
Note: If there is a block from the side, or if an opponent turns his back as the block is being made, it is not clipping if the opponent is able to see or ward off the block, provided the blocker does not roll up on the back or side of the opponent’s leg(s). 
If an offensive player’s block (legal or illegal) is followed by the blocker rolling up on the back or side of the leg(s) of a defender, it is clipping, including in close-line play. 
When a blocker, who is moving in the same direction as an opponent, initially contacts the opponent on his side, and subsequently contacts the opponent below his waist from behind, it is not clipping if the contact is continuous. 
Clipping shall not be called if an official has not observed the blocker’s initial contact with an opponent. 
Penalty: For clipping: Loss of 15 yards. 
ARTICLE 2. PEEL BACK BLOCK. An offensive player cannot initiate contact on the side and below the waist against an opponent if: 
	.	(a)  the blocker is moving toward his own end line; and  
	.	(b)  he approaches the opponent from behind or from the side unless his near shoulder completely crosses the front of both of  his opponent’s legs.  
Penalty: For a peel back block: Loss of 15 yards. 
45 
ARTICLE 3. ILLEGAL CUT BLOCK. See 8-4-5. 
ARTICLE 4. BLOCKING BELOW THE WAIST. Blocks below the waist are prohibited in the following situations: (a) By players of either team after a change of possession; or (b) By players of the kicking team after a free kick, safety kick, fair catch kick, punt, field goal attempt, or Try kick; (c) By players of the receiving team during a down in which there is a free kick, safety kick, fair catch kick, punt, field goal attempt, 
or Try kick; or (d) By players of either team during a scrimmage down prior to a change of possession unless the contact occurs in the tight end 
box. (Note: Players are prohibited from initiating contact below the waist of an opponent outside the tight end box (See 3-34), except against a runner or a player who is attempting to catch a forward or backward pass). 
Note: The following blocking restrictions may result in a foul even if they occur in the tight end box: (i) Illegal cut block. See 8-4-5. (ii) Clipping. See 12-2-1. (iii) Peelbackblock.See12-2-2. 
(iv) Chopblock.See12-2-5. (v) Crackback block. See 12-2-6. 
Penalty: For illegally blocking below the waist: Loss of 15 yards. 
ARTICLE 5. CHOP BLOCK. All chop blocks are illegal. A chop block is a high/low double team block by the offense in which one offensive player (designated as A1 for purposes of this rule) blocks a defensive player in the area of the thigh or lower while another offensive player (A2) engages that same defensive player above the waist. The order of the blocks is irrelevant. 
Chop blocks include, but are not limited to, the following situations: 
	.	(a)  A1 chops a defensive player while the defensive player is physically engaged above the waist by the blocking attempt of A2.  
	.	(b)  A2 physically engages a defensive player above the waist with a blocking attempt, and A1 chops the defensive player after the contact by A2 has been broken and while A2 is still confronting the defensive player.  
	.	(c)  A1 chops a defensive player while A2 confronts the defensive player in a pass-blocking posture but is not physically engaged with the defensive player (a “lure”).  
	.	(d)  A1 blocks a defensive player in the area of the thigh or lower, and A2, simultaneously or immediately after the block by A1, engages the defensive player high (“reverse chop”).  
	.	(e)  A1 is lined up in the backfield at the snap and subsequently chops a defensive player engaged above the waist by A2.  
	.	(f)  A1, an offensive lineman, chops a defensive player after the defensive player has been engaged by A2 (high or low).  
Note: It is not a foul if the defender initiates the contact with the blocker, or if the blocker is trying to slip or escape from the defender, and any engagement with him is incidental. 
Penalty: For chop block: Loss of 15 yards. 
ARTICLE 6. CRACKBACK BLOCK. 
Item 1. Definition. It is an illegal crackback block if the following conditions are fulfilled: 
The block occurs within an area five yards on either side of the line of scrimmage, including within close-line play, by an offensive player who is moving toward the position from which the ball was snapped; and 
	.	(a)  the offensive player was in a set position and aligned more than two yards outside an offensive tackle (flexed) when the ball was snapped; or  
	.	(b)  the offensive player was in a backfield position when the ball was snapped and moved to a position more than two yards outside an offensive tackle; or  
	.	(c)  the offensive player was in a backfield position and in motion when the ball was snapped.  
Item 2. Prohibited Contact. The following is prohibited against a player who is the recipient of a crackback block: 
	.	(a)  Contacting him below the waist;  
	.	(b)  forcibly hitting his head or neck area with the helmet, facemask, forearm, or shoulder, even if the initial contact is lower than  the player’s neck;  
	.	(c)  lowering the head and making forcible contact with any part of the helmet against any part of the defensive player’s body; or  
	.	(d)  illegally launching into him. It is an illegal launch if a player (i) leaves one or both feet prior to contact to spring forward and  upward into his opponent, and (ii) uses any part of his helmet to initiate forcible contact against any part of his opponent’s body. (This does not apply to contact against a runner, unless the runner is still considered to be a defenseless player, as defined in Article 9).  
Penalty: For a crackback block: Loss of 15 yards. 
ARTICLE 7. BLINDSIDE BLOCK. It is a foul if a player initiates a block when his path is toward or parallel to his own end line and makes forcible contact to his opponent with his helmet, forearm, or shoulder, unless the contact occurs in close-line play prior to the ball leaving that area. The ball is not considered to have left that area if the player who takes the snap, either from shotgun position or from under center, retreats in the pocket immediately or with slight delay, and hands the ball to another player, or runs with the ball himself during a designed play. Any forcible contact in close-line play is still subject to the restrictions for crackback and peel back blocks. 
Penalty: For a blindside block: Loss of 15 yards. 
46 
ARTICLE 8. UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS. There shall be no unnecessary roughness. This shall include, but will not be limited to: 
	.	(a)  using the foot or any part of the leg to strike an opponent with a whipping motion (leg whip);  
	.	(b)  forcibly contacting a runner when he is out of bounds;  Note: Defensive players must make an effort to avoid contact. Players on defense are responsible for knowing when a runner has crossed the boundary line, except in doubtful cases where he might step on a boundary line and continue parallel with it.  
	.	(c)  a player of the receiving team who has gone out of bounds and blocks a kicking team player out of bounds during the kick. If this occurs on a kick from scrimmage, post-possession rules will apply if appropriate (9-5-1);  
	.	(d)  running, diving into, or throwing the body against or on a runner whose forward progress has been stopped, who has slid or taken a knee, or who has declared himself down by going to the ground untouched and has made no attempt to advance. See 7-2-1-d-Notes regarding a sliding player;  
	.	(e)  running, diving into, or throwing the body against or on any player on the ground either before or after the ball is dead;  
	.	(f)  throwing the runner to the ground after the ball is dead;  
	.	(g)  unnecessarily running into, diving into, or throwing the body against or on a player who (1) is out of the play or (2) should not  have reasonably anticipated such contact by an opponent, before or after the ball is dead;  
	.	(h)  pulling an opponent off a pile of players in an aggressive or forcible manner; or  
(i) a kicker/punter, who is standing still or fading backward after the ball has been kicked, is out of the play and must not be 
unnecessarily contacted by the receiving team through the end of the down or until he assumes a distinctly defensive position. However, a kicker/punter is a defenseless player through the conclusion of the down (see 12-2-9-a-8). 
Penalty: For unnecessary roughness: Loss of 15 yards. The player may be disqualified if the action is judged by the official(s) to be flagrant. If the foul is by the defense, it is also an automatic first down. 
Note: When in question about a roughness call or potentially dangerous tactics, the covering official(s) should always call unnecessary roughness. 
ARTICLE 9. PLAYERS IN A DEFENSELESS POSTURE. It is a foul if a player initiates unnecessary contact against a player who is in a defenseless posture. A player who initiates contact against a defenseless opponent is responsible for avoiding an illegal act. A standard of strict liability applies for any contact against an opponent, even if his body position is in motion, and irrespective of any acts by him, such as ducking his head or curling up his body in anticipation of contact. 
(a) Players in a defenseless posture are: (1) A player in the act of or just after throwing a pass (passing posture). (2) A receiver running a pass route when the defender approaches from the side or behind. If the receiver becomes a blocker 
or assumes a blocking posture, he is no longer a defenseless player. (3) A player attempting to catch a pass who has not had time to clearly become a runner. If the player is capable of avoiding 
or warding off the impending contact of an opponent, he is no longer a defenseless player. (4) The intended receiver of a pass in the action during and immediately following an interception or potential interception. If the player is capable of avoiding or warding off the impending contact of an opponent, he is no longer a defenseless player. Violations of this provision will be enforced after the interception, and the intercepting team will maintain 
possession. (5) A runner already in the grasp of a tackler and whose forward progress has been stopped. (6) A kickoff or punt returner attempting to field a kick in the air who has not had time to clearly become a runner. If the player 
is capable of avoiding or warding off the impending contact of an opponent, he is no longer a defenseless player. (7) A player on the ground. (8) A kicker/punter during the kick or during the return (also see Article 8-h for additional restrictions against a kicker/punter). (9) A quarterback at any time after a change of possession (also see Article 11-e for additional restrictions against a 
quarterback after a change of possession). (10) A player who receives an illegal blindside block. (11) A player who receives an illegal crackback block. (12) The offensive player who attempts a snap during a Field Goal attempt or a Try Kick. He is no longer a defenseless player 
after he has had an opportunity to defend himself or moves downfield. 
(b) Prohibited contact against a player who is in a defenseless posture is listed below. However, these provisions do not prohibit incidental contact by the mask or helmet in the course of a conventional tackle or block on an opponent: 
	.	(1)  forcibly hitting the defenseless player’s head or neck area with the helmet, facemask, forearm, or shoulder, even if the  initial contact is lower than the player’s neck, and regardless of whether the defensive player also uses his arms to tackle  the defenseless player by encircling or grasping him;  
	.	(2)  lowering the head and making forcible contact with any part of the helmet against any part of the defenseless player’s  body; or  
	.	(3)  illegally launching into a defenseless opponent. It is an illegal launch if a player (i) leaves one or both feet prior to contact  to spring forward and upward into his opponent, and (ii) uses any part of his helmet to initiate forcible contact against any part of his opponent’s body. (This does not apply to contact against a runner, unless the runner is still considered to be a defenseless player, as defined in Article 9).  
Penalty: For unnecessary roughness: Loss of 15 yards and an automatic first down. The player may be disqualified if the action is judged by the official(s) to be flagrant. 
ARTICLE 10. IMPERMISSIBLE USE OF THE HELMET. It is a foul if a player: (a) lowers his head and makes forcible contact with his helmet against an opponent; or 
47 
(b) uses any part of his helmet or facemask to butt or make forcible contact to an opponent’s head or neck area. 
These provisions do not prohibit incidental contact by the mask or the helmet in the course of a conventional tackle or block on an opponent. 
Penalty: For impermissible use of the helmet: Loss of 15 yards. If the foul is by the defense, it is also an automatic first down. The player may be disqualified. 
ARTICLE 11. ROUGHING THE PASSER. Because the act of passing often puts the quarterback (or any other player attempting a pass) in a position where he is particularly vulnerable to injury, special rules against roughing the passer apply. Players in a passing posture are considered to be a player in a defenseless posture. Any physical acts against a player who is in a passing posture (i.e. before, during, or after a pass) which, in the game official’s judgment, are unwarranted by the circumstances of the play will be called as fouls. When in doubt about a roughness call or a potentially dangerous tactic against the passer, the game official should call roughing the passer. The game official will be guided by the following principles: 
	.	(a)  Roughing will be called if, in the game official’s judgment, a pass rusher clearly should have known that the ball had already left the passer’s hand before contact was made; pass rushers are responsible for being aware of the position of the ball in passing situations; the game official will use the release of the ball from the passer’s hand as his guideline that the passer is now fully protected; once a pass has been released by a passer, a rushing defender may make direct contact with the passer only up through the rusher’s first step after such release (prior to second step hitting the ground); thereafter the rusher must be making an attempt to avoid contact and must not continue to “drive through” or otherwise forcibly contact the passer; incidental or inadvertent contact by a player who is easing up or being blocked into the passer will not be considered significant.  
	.	(b)  A rushing defender is prohibited from committing such intimidating and punishing acts as “stuffing” a passer into the ground or unnecessarily wrestling or driving him down after the passer has thrown the ball, even if the rusher makes his initial contact with the passer within the one-step limitation provided for in (a) above. When tackling a passer who is in a defenseless posture (e.g., during or just after throwing a pass), a defensive player must not unnecessarily or violently throw him down or land on top of him with all or most of the defender’s weight. Instead, the defensive player must strive to fall to the side of the quarterback’s body, or to brace his fall with his arms to avoid landing on the quarterback with all or most of his body weight.  
	.	(c)  In covering the passer position, game officials will be particularly alert to fouls in which defenders impermissibly use the helmet and/or facemask to hit the passer, or use hands, arms, or other parts of the body to hit the passer forcibly in the head or neck area (see also the other unnecessary roughness rules covering these subjects). A defensive player must not use his helmet against a passer who is in a defenseless posture—for example, (1) forcibly hitting the passer’s head or neck area with the helmet or facemask, even if the initial contact of the defender’s helmet or facemask is lower than the passer’s neck, and regardless of whether the defensive player also uses his arms to tackle the passer by encircling or grasping him; or (2) lowering the head and making forcible contact with any part of the helmet against any part of the passer’s body. This rule does not prohibit incidental contact by the mask or the helmet in the course of a conventional tackle on a passer.  
	.	(d)  A rushing defender is prohibited from forcibly hitting in the knee area or below a passer who has one or both feet on the ground, even if the initial contact is above the knee. It is not a foul if the defender is blocked (or fouled) into the passer and has no opportunity to avoid him. A defender cannot initiate a roll or launch and forcibly hit the passer in the knee area or below, even if he is being contacted by another player. It is not a foul if the defender swipes or grabs a passer in the knee area or below in an attempt to tackle him, provided he does not make forcible contact with the helmet, shoulder, chest, or forearm.  
	.	(e)  A passer who is standing still or fading backward after the ball has left his hand is obviously out of the play and must not be unnecessarily contacted by an opponent through the end of the down or until the passer becomes a blocker, or a runner, or, in the event of a change of possession during the down, until he assumes a distinctly defensive position. However, at any time after the change of possession, it is a foul if:  (1) an opponent forcibly hits the quarterback’s head or neck area with his helmet, facemask, forearm, or shoulder (2) if an opponent lowers his head and makes forcible contact with any part of his helmet against any part of the passer’s body. This provision does not prohibit incidental contact by the mask or the helmet in the course of a conventional block.  
	.	(f)  When the passer goes outside the pocket area and either continues moving with the ball (without attempting to advance the ball as a runner) or throws while on the run, he loses the protection of the one-step rule provided for in (a) above, and the protection against a low hit provided for in (d) above, but he remains covered by all the other special protections afforded to a passer in the pocket (b, c, and e), as well as the regular unnecessary roughness rules applicable to all player positions. If the passer stops behind the line and clearly establishes a passing posture, he will then be covered by all of the special  protections for passers.  
	.	(g)  The game official must blow the play dead as soon as the passer is clearly in the grasp and control of any tackler behind the  line, and the passer’s safety is in jeopardy.  
Penalty: For roughing the passer: Loss of 15 yards and an automatic first down; disqualification, if flagrant. 
ARTICLE 12. ROUGHING/RUNNING INTO THE KICKER. No defensive player may run into or rough a kicker who kicks from behind the line unless such contact: 
	.	(a)  is incidental to and occurs after the defender has touched the kick in flight, or occurs simultaneously with the kicker kicking  the ball;  
	.	(b)  is caused by the kicker’s own motions;  
	.	(c)  occurs during a quick kick or a rugby-style kick;  
	.	(d)  occurs during or after a run behind the line;  
	.	(e)  occurs after the kicker recovers a loose ball on the ground;  
	.	(f)  occurs because a defender is pushed or blocked (causing a change of direction) into the kicker; or  
	.	(g)  is the result of a foul by an opponent  
48 
Item 1. Roughing the kicker. It is a foul for roughing the kicker if a defensive player: (a) contacts the plant leg of the kicker while his kicking leg is still in the air; (b) slides into or contacts the kicker when both of the kicker’s feet are on the ground. It is not a foul if the contact is not severe, 
or if the kicker returns both feet to the ground prior to the contact and falls over a defender on the ground; or (c) commits any other act of unnecessary roughness. 
Item 2. Running into the Kicker. It is a foul for running into the kicker if a defensive player: (a) contacts the kicking leg or foot of the kicker, even if the kicker is airborne when the contact occurs; or (b) slides under the kicker, preventing him from returning both feet to the ground 
Penalties: (1) For roughing the kicker: Loss of 15 yards from the previous spot (personal foul) and an automatic first down. The 
player may be disqualified if the action is flagrant. (2) For running into the kicker: Loss of five yards from the previous spot (not a personal foul). There is not an automatic 
first down. 
ARTICLE 13. ROUGHING THE HOLDER. It is a foul for roughing the holder if a defensive player forcibly contacts the holder of a place kick, unless the contact: (a) is incidental and occurs after the defender has touched the kick in flight; (b) is caused because a defender is blocked into the holder; 
(c) occurs after the holder recovers a ball that has touched the ground; or (d) commits any other act of unnecessary roughness. 
Penalty: For roughing the holder: Loss of 15 yards from the previous spot (personal foul) and an automatic first down. The player may be disqualified if the action is flagrant. 
Note: 
(1) When two defensive players are making a bona fide attempt to block a kick from scrimmage (punt, drop kick, and/or placekick), and one of them runs into the kicker or holder after the ball has left the kicker’s foot at the same instant the second player blocks the kick, the foul for running into the kicker or holder shall not be enforced, unless in the judgment of the Referee, the player running into the kicker or holder was clearly the direct cause of the kick being blocked. 
ARTICLE 14. STRIKING, KICKING, TRIPPING OR KNEEING OPPONENTS. All players are prohibited from: (a) striking an opponent with his fists; (b) kicking or kneeing an opponent; (c) tripping an opponent, including the runner; 
(d) striking, swinging at, or clubbing the head or neck of an opponent with the wrist(s), arm(s), elbow(s), or hand(s); or 
Exceptions: Contact to the head, neck, or face of an opponent with the palm of the hand is permitted: 
	.	(1)  by a defensive player who is attempting to ward off an offensive player at the line of scrimmage, provided that it is not a  repeated act against the same opponent during any one contact; or  
	.	(2)  by any player in a personal attempt to recover a loose ball.  
(e) striking an opponent below the shoulders with his forearm or elbows by turning the trunk of his body at the waist, or by pivoting, or by any other way that is clearly unnecessary. 
Penalty: For prohibited acts in (a-e) above: Loss of 15 yards. If any of the fouls is judged by the official(s) to be flagrant, the offender may be disqualified as long as the entire action is observed by the official(s). If the foul is by the defense, it is also an automatic first down. 
ARTICLE 15. TWISTING, PULLING, OR TURNING THE FACEMASK OR HELMET OPENING. If a player grasps an opponent’s facemask or helmet opening, he must immediately release it. He shall not grasp and control, twist, turn, push, or pull the facemask or helmet opening of an opponent in any direction. 
Penalty: For twisting, turning, pushing, pulling, or controlling the mask or helmet opening: Loss of 15 yards. The player may be disqualified if the action is flagrant. If the foul is by the defense, it is also an automatic first down. 
ARTICLE 16. HORSE-COLLAR TACKLE. No player shall grab the inside collar of the back or the side of the shoulder pads or jersey, or grab the jersey at the name plate or above, and pull the runner toward the ground. This does not apply to a runner who is in the pocket or in the area defined by close-line play. If his knees are buckled by the action, it is a foul, even if the runner is not pulled completely to the ground. 
Penalty: For a horse-collar tackle: Loss of 15 yards and an automatic first down. ARTICLE 17. USE OF HELMET AS A WEAPON. A player may not use a helmet that is no longer worn by anyone as a weapon 
to strike, swing at, or throw at an opponent. 
Penalty: For illegal use of a helmet as a weapon: Loss of 15 yards and automatic disqualification. If the foul is by the defense, it is also an automatic first down. 
ARTICLE 18. OTHER PERSONAL FOULS. Fouls that include a 15-yard penalty, but are not listed in this Section or in Section 3, are considered Personal Fouls for penalty enforcement purposes. 
49 
SECTION 3 UNSPORTSMANLIKE CONDUCT 
ARTICLE 1. PROHIBITED ACTS. There shall be no unsportsmanlike conduct. This applies to any act which is contrary to the generally understood principles of sportsmanship. Such acts specifically include, among others: (a) Throwing a punch, or a forearm, or kicking at an opponent, even though no contact is made. (b) Using abusive, threatening, or insulting language or gestures to opponents, teammates, officials, or representatives of the 
League. (c) Using baiting or taunting acts or words that may engender ill will between teams. (d) Any violent gesture, or an act that is sexually suggestive or offensive. (e) Unnecessary physical contact with a game official. Under no circumstance is a player allowed to shove, push, or strike an 
official in an offensive, disrespectful, or unsportsmanlike manner. The player shall be disqualified from the game, and any such action must be reported to the Commissioner, who may impose further discipline. 
Note: Violations of (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) will be penalized if they occur anywhere in the stadium in which the officials have jurisdiction. 
(f) Prolonged or excessive celebrations or demonstrations by an individual player or multiple players. (g) Using any object as a prop, or possessing any foreign or extraneous object(s) that are not part of the uniform on the field or the sideline during the game, other than the football after a scoring play or change of possession. If any foreign object(s) are deemed a safety hazard by the game officials, in addition to a yardage penalty, the player will be subject to ejection from the 
game, whether he uses the object or not. 
Note: Violations of (f) and (g) will be penalized if they occur anywhere on the field other than the bench area. (h) Removal of his helmet by a player in the field of play or the end zone during a celebration or demonstration, or during a 
confrontation with a game official or any other player. 
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct (a) through (h): Loss of 15 yards from the succeeding spot or whatever spot the Referee, after consulting with the crew, deems equitable. If the foul is by the defense, it is also an automatic first down. If the action is flagrant and a game official sees the entire action, the player is also disqualified. See 19-2 for authority of Officiating department to instruct officiating crew to disqualify a player. 
Two violations of (a), (b), or (c) by the same player which occur before or during the game will result in disqualification in addition to the yardage penalty. Any violations at the game site on the day of the game, including postgame, may result in discipline by the Commissioner. 
	.	(i)  Using acts or words by the defensive team that are designed to disconcert an offensive team at the snap. An official must blow his whistle immediately to stop play.  
	.	(j)  Concealing the ball underneath the uniform or using any article of equipment to simulate a ball.  
	.	(k)  Using entering substitutes, legally returning players, substitutes on sidelines, or withdrawn players to confuse opponents,  including lingering by players leaving the field after being replaced by a substitute. See 5-2.  
	.	(l)  An offensive player lining up or going in motion less than five yards from the sideline in front of his team’s designated bench  area. However, an offensive player is permitted to line up less than five yards from the sidelines on the same side as his  team’s player bench, provided he is not in front of the designated bench area.  
	.	(m)  Attempting to conserve time after the two-minute warning of either half by repeatedly violating the substitution rule while the  ball is dead and time is in. See 4-7-2.  
	.	(n)  Two successive delay-of-game penalties during the same down when time is in.  
	.	(o)  Jumping or standing on a teammate or opponent to block or attempt to block an opponent’s kick or apparent kick.  
	.	(p)  Placing a hand or hands on a teammate or opponent to gain additional height to: (1) block or attempt to block an opponent’s  kick or apparent kick; or (2) attempt to jump through any gap between offensive players to block an opponent’s kick or apparent  kick.  
	.	(q)  Picking up a teammate to block or attempt to block an opponent’s kick or apparent kick.  
	.	(r)  Running forward and leaping across the line of scrimmage in an obvious attempt to block a field goal or Try Kick, or apparent  kick, unless the leaping player was in a stationary position within one yard of the line of scrimmage when the ball was snapped. A player who is more than one yard behind the line of scrimmage before or at the snap, may run forward and leap, provided he does not cross the line of scrimmage or land on players. Rule 3-19-3 does not apply.  
	.	(s)  Goaltending by a defensive player leaping up to deflect a kick as it passes above the crossbar of a goalpost. The referee may award three points for a palpably unfair act (12-3-4).  
	.	(t)  A punter, placekicker, or holder who simulates being roughed or run into by a defensive player.  
	.	(u)  If a member of the kicking team is forced out of bounds, or goes out of bounds voluntarily, and does not attempt to return  inbounds in a reasonable amount of time.  
	.	(v)  Attempting to call an excess or illegal timeout to “freeze” a kicker prior to a field goal attempt or a Try Kick when:  (1) a team has already been charged a timeout during the same dead ball period; or (2) a team has exhausted its three charged team timeouts that are permitted in a half  If an attempt is made to call a timeout in these situations, the officials shall not grant a timeout, play will continue, and a penalty for unsportsmanlike conduct shall be enforced after the down has been completed. The penalty shall be enforced as a dead ball foul if a timeout is inadvertently granted.  
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct (i) through (v): Loss of 15 yards from: 
50 
(a) the succeeding spot if the ball is dead; or (b) the previous spot if the ball was in play. 
If the infraction is flagrant, the player is also disqualified. If the foul is by the defense, it is also an automatic first down. ARTICLE 2. FOULS TO PREVENT SCORE. The defense shall not commit successive or repeated fouls to prevent a score. 
Penalty: For successive or repeated fouls to prevent a score: If the violation is repeated after a warning, the score involved is awarded to the offensive team. 
ARTICLE 3. INTENTIONAL FOULS TO MANIPULATE GAME CLOCK. A team may not commit multiple fouls during the same down in an attempt to manipulate the game clock. 
Penalty: For multiple fouls to run off time from the game clock: Loss of 15 yards, and the game clock will be reset to where it was at the snap. After the penalty is enforced, the game clock will start on the next snap. 
ARTICLE 4. PALPABLY UNFAIR ACT. A player or substitute shall not interfere with play by any act which is palpably unfair. 
Penalty: For a palpably unfair act: Offender may be disqualified. The Referee, after consulting the officiating crew, enforces any such distance penalty as they consider equitable and irrespective of any other specified code penalty. The Referee may award a score. See 19-1-3. 
SECTION 4 AUTOMATIC DISQUALIFICATION 
ARTICLE 1. MULTIPLE UNSPORTSMANLIKE CONDUCT FOULS. In addition to any penalty referenced elsewhere in the Official Playing Rules, a player or non-player personnel will be automatically disqualified if that person is penalized twice in the same game for committing one of the unsportsmanlike conduct fouls listed below, or a combination of the fouls listed below: (a) Throwing a punch, or a forearm, or kicking at an opponent, even though no contact is made. 
(b) Using abusive, threatening, or insulting language or gestures to opponents, teammates, officials, or representatives of the League. 
(c) Using baiting or taunting acts or words that may engender ill will between teams. 
The player or non-player personnel will be automatically disqualified regardless of whether the penalty is accepted or declined by the opponent. The fouls do not have to be judged by the official to be flagrant for the automatic disqualification to occur, and any foul that occurs during the pregame warm-up period will carry over into the game. Nothing in this section supersedes the Game Official’s discretion to judge a foul to be flagrant and disqualify the player based on one occurrence. 
SECTION 5 ILLEGAL BATS AND KICKS 
ARTICLE 1. ILLEGAL BAT. It is an illegal bat if: (a) any player bats or punches a loose ball in the field of play toward his opponent’s goal line; (b) any player bats or punches a loose ball (that has touched the ground) in any direction, if it is in either end zone; (c) an offensive player bats a backward pass in flight toward his opponent’s goal line; or (d) a forward pass that is controlled by a player prior to completing the catch is thrown forward (the ball remains alive if caught 
by a teammate or intercepted). 
Exception: A forward pass in flight may be tipped, batted, or deflected in any direction by any eligible player at any time. ARTICLE 2. ILLEGALLY KICKING BALL. No player may deliberately kick a loose ball or a ball that is in a player’s possession. 
The ball is not dead when an illegally kicked ball is recovered, unless another rule prescribes otherwise. 
Penalty: For illegal batting or kicking the ball: Loss of 10 yards. If the foul is by Team A before possession changes during a scrimmage down: Loss of down and loss of 10 yards except for a foul by Team A beyond the line of scrimmage during a scrimmage kick, in which case there is no loss of down. 
ARTICLE 3. BALL BATTED OR ILLEGALLY KICKED INTO OPPONENT. A player is deemed to have not touched the ball if it is legally or illegally batted or illegally kicked into him by an opponent. Such touching is disregarded, although the bat or kick could create a first touching violation or a foul for an illegal bat or illegal kick. 
51 
RULE 13 NON-PLAYER CONDUCT 
SECTION 1 NON-PLAYER CONDUCT 
ARTICLE 1. NON-PLAYER FOULS. There shall be no unsportsmanlike conduct by a substitute, coach, attendant, or any other non-player (entitled to sit on a team’s bench) during any period or timeout (including between halves). 
Notes: 
(1) “Loud speaker” coaching from the sidelines is not permissible. (2) A player may communicate with a coach provided the coach is in his prescribed area during dead ball periods. (3) It is impermissible for the grounds crew or other team personnel to clear away snow for a Try kick, field goal, punt, or 
kickoff. 
ARTICLE 2. TEAM ATTENDANTS MAY ENTER FIELD DURING TIMEOUT. Either or both team attendants and their helpers may enter the field to attend to their team during a team timeout by either team. No other non-player may come on the field without the Referee’s permission, unless he is an incoming substitute (5-2-2). 
During any team timeout, all playing rules continue in force. Representatives of either team are prohibited from entering the field unless they are incoming substitutes, or team attendants or trainers entering to provide for the welfare of a player, and any game-type activities are prohibited on the field. The head coach may enter the field to check on the welfare of a player who is injured, but no assistant coach may enter the field. 
ARTICLE 3. BENCH CREDENTIALS. With the exception of uniformed players eligible to participate in the game, all persons in a team’s bench area must wear a visible credential clearly marked “BENCH.” For all NFL games—pre-season, regular season, and postseason the home club will be issued a maximum of 27 credentials and the visiting club will be issued a maximum of 25 credentials for use in its bench area. Such credentials must be worn by coaches, players under contract to the applicable club but ineligible to participate in the game, and team support personnel (trainers, doctors, equipment men). From time to time, persons with game services credentials (e.g., oxygen technicians, ball boys/girls) and authorized club personnel not regularly assigned to the bench area may be in a team’s bench area for a brief period without bench credentials. Clubs are prohibited from allowing into their bench areas any persons who are not officially affiliated with the club or otherwise serving a necessary game day function. 
ARTICLE 4. RESTRICTED AREAS. All team personnel must observe the zone restrictions applicable to the bench area and the border rimming the playing field. The only persons permitted within the solid six-foot white border (1-1-2) while play is in progress on the field are game officials. For reasons involving the safety of participating players whose actions may carry them out of bounds, officials’ unobstructed coverage of the game, and spectators’ sightlines to the field, the border rules must be observed by all coaches and players in the bench area. Violators are subject to penalty by the officials. 
ARTICLE 5. MOVEMENT ON SIDELINES. Coaches and other non-participating team personnel (including uniformed players not in the game at the time) are prohibited from moving laterally along the sidelines any further than the points that are 18 yards from the middle of the bench area (i.e., 25-yard lines to left and right of bench areas when benches are placed on opposite sides of the field). A head coach may move laterally down the sideline outside the bench area to call a team timeout or challenge an on-field ruling when the ball is positioned outside the bench area. Lateral movement within the bench area must be behind the solid six-foot white border. 
ARTICLE 6. NON-BENCH AREAS. Clubs are prohibited from allowing into the non-bench areas of field level any persons who have not been accredited to those locations by the home club’s public relations office for purposes related to news media coverage, stadium operations, or pregame and halftime entertainment. The home club is responsible for keeping the field level cleared of all unauthorized persons. Photographers and other personnel accredited for field-level work must not be permitted in the end zones or any other part of the official playing field while play is in progress. 
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct (illegal acts under Articles 1 through 6 above): Loss of 15 yards from team for whose supposed benefit foul was made. 
Enforcement is from: (a) the succeeding spot if the ball is dead; or (b) whatever spot the Referee, after consulting with the crew, deems equitable, if the ball was in play. 
For a flagrant violation, the Referee may exclude the offender(s) from the playing field enclosure for the remainder of the game. 
ARTICLE 7. PALPABLY UNFAIR ACT (NON-PLAYER). A non-player shall not commit any act which is palpably unfair. Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct (a palpably unfair act, see 12-3-4). The Referee, after consulting with the crew, 
shall make such ruling as he/she considers equitable (19-1-3). 
ARTICLE 8. NON-PLAYER PERSONNEL. Non-player personnel of a club (e.g., management personnel, coaches, trainers, equipment personnel) are prohibited from making unnecessary physical contact with or directing abusive, threatening, or insulting language or gestures at opponents, game officials, or representatives of the League. Violations before or during the game may also result in disqualification. Any violations at the game site on the day of the game, including postgame, may result in discipline by the Commissioner. 
Penalty: For unsportsmanlike conduct: Loss of 15 yards. Enforcement is from: (a) the succeeding spot if the ball is dead; (b) the previous spot if the ball was in play; or (c) whatever spot the Referee, after consulting with the crew, deems equitable. (palpably unfair act). 
52 
RULE 14 PENALTY ENFORCEMENT (Governing all cases not otherwise specifically provided for) 
SECTION 1 GENERAL RULES 
ARTICLE 1. REFUSAL OF PENALTIES. Unless expressly prohibited, the penalty for any foul may be declined by the offended team, and play proceeds as though no foul had been committed. The yardage distance for any penalty may be declined, even though the penalty is accepted. In all situations, a disqualified or suspended player must be removed, regardless of the number of fouls or their enforcement, including if the penalty is declined. 
ARTICLE 2. NUMBER OF DOWN AFTER PENALTY. Item 1. Foul by Team A. If the ball is behind the line to gain after the enforcement of a distance penalty for a foul by Team A that occurs prior to (between downs) or during a play from scrimmage, the number of the ensuing down remains the same, unless it is a combination penalty involving loss of down (see Item 2). 
Item 2. Combination Penalty. A combination penalty involving both distance and loss of down is enforced for the following fouls: 
	.	(a)  Illegal forward pass from behind or beyond the line (8-1-2-Pen. a)  
	.	(b)  Intentional grounding (8-2-1)  
	.	(c)  Illegally handing the ball forward (8-7-4)  
	.	(d)  Illegal batting of the ball (See 12-5-1)  
	.	(e)  Illegal kicking of the ball (See 12-5-2)  
If a loss-of-down penalty is enforced prior to fourth down, the number of the ensuing down is one greater than that of the previous down. If it is enforced on fourth down, the ball is awarded to Team B; if there is a combination penalty on fourth down, the distance penalty is also enforced. 
Item 3. Line to Gain and Change of Possession. If a change (or multiple changes) of possession is negated by enforcement of a penalty against Team A during a play from scrimmage, the line to gain for Team A remains the same. 
Item 4. Ball in Advance of Line to Gain. If the ball is in advance of the line to gain after the enforcement of a distance penalty for a foul by Team A during a play from scrimmage, it is first-and-10 for Team A. It is also first-and-10 after enforcement for a dead ball foul (Section 4, Article 9) by Team A at the end of a play from scrimmage when there has not been a change of possession. 
Exception: A foul against an official, regardless of when it occurs, is always treated as a foul between downs. 12-3-1-e. Item 5. Foul by Team B. After a penalty for a foul by Team B prior to (between downs) or during a play from scrimmage, the 
ensuing down is first-and-10 for Team A. 
Exceptions: 
(1) Offside. (2) Encroachment. (3) Neutral zone infraction. (4) Delay of game. (5) Illegal substitution. (6) Excess time out. (7) Running into the kicker. (8) More than 11 players on the field at the snap. (9) More than 11 players in the formation prior to the snap. (10) Illegal formation by the defense during a scrimmage kick play. 
For the above exceptions, the number of the down and the line to gain remain the same unless a distance penalty places the ball on or in advance of the line to gain, in which case it is first-and-10 for Team A. 
Item 6. Foul After Change of Possession. If there is a foul, including a dead ball foul, after team possession has changed during a down, following enforcement of a distance penalty, it is first-and-10 for the team that was in possession at the time of the foul. 
Item 7. Foul Between Downs. If there is a foul between downs, the down remains the same, unless enforcement of the foul results in a first down. 
Item 8. Double Fouls. If there is a double foul during the down, and the fouls offset, the down is replayed, and the number of the down remains the same. 
ARTICLE 3. CHOICE OF PENALTIES (MULTIPLE FOULS). If there is a multiple foul (3-14-1-d) during the down, only one penalty may be enforced after the Referee has explained the alternatives to the offended team. 
Exceptions: 
(1) A foul against an official is not part of a multiple foul and will be enforced in addition to any other foul. (2) If there is a personal foul that is also defensive pass interference, both fouls may be enforced. 
SECTION 2 SPECIAL ENFORCEMENT FOR PENALTIES 
ARTICLE 1. HALF-DISTANCE PENALTY. If the enforcement of a distance penalty would move the ball more than half the distance from the spot of enforcement to the offender’s goal line, the penalty shall be half the distance from the spot of enforcement to its goal line. This general rule supersedes any other general or specific enforcement of a distance penalty. 
Exceptions: 
(1) See Rule 8-2-1 for enforcement for intentional grounding. (2) See Rule 12-3-4 for enforcement for a palpably unfair act. 
53 
ARTICLE 2. FOUL BEHIND A GOAL LINE. 
	.	(a)  When the spot of enforcement for a foul by the defense is behind the offensive goal line, a distance penalty is enforced from the goal line. However, if the play results in a touchback, the penalty is enforced from the 20-yard line, or from the 25-yard line if the impetus was from a free kick. See Section 4, Article 6 for fouls during a backward pass or fumble and Section 4, Article 4 (b), Note, for exception when a player’s momentum carries him into the end zone.  
	.	(b)  When the spot of enforcement for a foul by the offense is behind the offensive goal line, it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.  
	.	(c)  When the spot of enforcement for a foul by the offense is behind the defensive goal line, a distance penalty is enforced from the goal line.  
ARTICLE 3. FOUL DURING A SCORE. If a team commits a personal or unsportsmanlike conduct foul, or a palpably unfair act, during a down in which the opponent scores, the penalty is enforced on the succeeding free kick (unless the score resulted from the enforcement). On a touchdown, the penalty, whether a live ball or dead ball foul or a foul between downs, may be enforced on the succeeding kickoff or Try. On a successful Try kick, any foul by Team B that does not result in a re-Try or negate a score may be enforced on the succeeding free kick. In all scoring situations, the offended team also has the option of accepting the penalty with customary enforcement and beginning a new series, or replaying the down, instead of counting the points. 
ARTICLE 4. PERSONAL FOULS AND UNSPORTSMANLIKE CONDUCT FOULS. If any team commits a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul that is not part of a double foul, and the opponent has possession at the end of the down, enforcement may be from the dead ball spot in addition to any other enforcement options provided by rule. 
SECTION 3 SPOT FROM WHICH PENALTY IS ENFORCED 
ARTICLE 1. GOVERNING PROVISIONS. The general provisions of Rule 14 govern all spots of enforcement, except for specific enforcements designated elsewhere in these rules. 
ARTICLE 2. FOUL BY NON-PLAYER. Penalties for fouls committed by non-players shall be enforced as provided for in Rule 13. ARTICLE 3. ENFORCEMENT SPOT NOT GOVERNED. When the spot of enforcement is not governed by a general or specific 
rule, it is the spot of the foul. 
ARTICLE 4. SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT. The spot of enforcement is the spot at which a penalty is enforced. There are seven spots that are commonly used: 
	.	(a)  The previous spot: The spot at which the ball was last put in play.  
	.	(b)  The spot of the foul: The spot at which a foul was committed or, by rule, is considered to have been committed.  
	.	(c)  The spot of a backward pass or a fumble: The spot at which the backward pass or fumble occurred during the down in which  there was a foul.  
	.	(d)  The dead ball spot: The spot at which the ball became dead.  
	.	(e)  The succeeding spot: The spot at which the ball will next be put in play (i.e., the spot of the ball after enforcement for a foul,  or, if there has been no foul, the spot at which the ball became dead).  
	.	(f)  The other Try spot: The yard line of the other Try option, as determined by any previously enforced penalties, if applicable.  
	.	(g)  The spot of a change of possession: The spot at which possession is gained by or awarded to the opponent.  
ARTICLE 5. BASIC SPOT. The basic spot is a reference point that is used to determine the spot of enforcement for fouls committed pursuant to the Three-and-One Method of Enforcement. It is applicable for fouls committed during (i) a running play or (ii) a backward pass or fumble. 
	.	(a)  For fouls committed during a running play which is not followed by a change of possession, the basic spot is the dead ball spot.  
	.	(b)  For fouls committed during a running play which is followed by a change of possession, the basic spot is the spot where possession is lost.  
	.	(c)  For fouls committed during a backward pass or fumble, the basic spot is the spot of the backward pass or the spot of the fumble.  
ARTICLE 6. THREE-AND-ONE METHOD OF ENFORCEMENT. For fouls committed during a run, a backward pass, or a fumble, the penalty is enforced from the basic spot if: (a) the defense fouls in advance of the basic spot; (b) the defense fouls behind the basic spot; or 
(c) the offense fouls in advance of the basic spot. If the offense fouls behind the basic spot, enforcement is from the spot of the foul (three-and-one method of enforcement). 
Exceptions for fouls committed by the offense: 
(1) Fouls committed by the offense behind the line of scrimmage are enforced from the previous spot. (2) If the offense commits a foul behind its own goal line, it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot. 
See Rule 8-2-1 for enforcement for intentional grounding. (3) If the offense commits a foul beyond the line of scrimmage and the basic spot is behind the line of scrimmage, 
enforcement is from the previous spot. If the dead ball spot is in the offensive end zone, it is a safety, regardless of where 
the foul occurs. (4) If the offense commits a foul in the defense’s end zone prior to scoring a touchdown, enforcement is from the goal line. 
Exception for fouls committed by the defense: 
(1) When the basic spot is behind the line of scrimmage, and the defense has committed a foul either behind or beyond the line of scrimmage, the penalty is enforced from the previous spot. 
54 
SECTION 4 SPOTS OF ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE 1. FOUL BEFORE OR AT THE SNAP. Item 1. Before the Snap. A foul that occurs prior to the snap is enforced from the succeeding spot, and the down remains the same, unless enforcement of the foul results in a first down. 
Item 2. At the Snap. A foul that occurs at the snap is enforced from the previous spot, and the down is repeated, unless enforcement of the foul results in a first down. 
ARTICLE 2. FOUL COMMITTED DURING RUNNING PLAY. For a foul committed during a running play when there is not a subsequent change of possession during the down, the basic spot is the dead ball spot. The three-and-one method of enforcement is used (see Section 3, Article 6). 
Note: A foul during a run prior to a forward pass or kick from behind the line is enforced as a foul during a passing play or during a scrimmage kick. 
ARTICLE 3. FOUL COMMITTED DURING RUNNING PLAY BEFORE CHANGE OF POSSESSION. When a foul occurs during a running play, and the run in which the foul occurs is followed by a change of possession, the basic spot is the spot where possession is lost. The three-and-one method of enforcement is used (see Section 3, Article 6). 
	.	(a)  If the foul is by the defensive team, the ball reverts to the offensive team prior to enforcement of the foul.  
	.	(b)  If the foul is by the offensive team, the defense must decline the penalty to retain possession. However, if the foul by the offense was a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul, the defense retains possession, and enforcement is from the dead ball spot. If the defense subsequently loses possession, the penalty is enforced from the spot where possession  changed, and the defense retains possession.  
	.	(c)  If there are multiple fouls by the defense, the enforcement shall be that which is most beneficial to the offense.  
ARTICLE 4. FOUL COMMITTED AFTER CHANGE OF POSSESSION (END ZONE ENFORCEMENT). If there is a foul by either team after a change of possession, and the dead ball spot is in Team B’s end zone, enforcement shall be as follows: 
	.	(a)  Fouls by Team A: 
	.	(1)  If the impetus that sent the ball in touch was provided by Team B, enforcement is from the goal line. See Note below for  exception when a player’s momentum carries him into the end zone.  
	.	(2)  If the impetus that sent the ball in touch was provided by Team A, enforcement is from the 20-yard line, or from the 25-  yard line if the impetus was from a free kick.  
	.	(b)  Fouls by Team B (Team A impetus): (1) If Team B attempts to advance the ball, and the spot of its foul is in the end zone, the result is a safety. (2) If Team B does not attempt to advance the ball, and its foul occurs in the end zone, enforcement is from the 20-yard line,  or from the 25-yard line if the impetus was from a free kick. (3) If the spot of its foul is in the field of play, the penalty is enforced from either the spot of the foul or the touchback spot  (20 or 25), whichever is least beneficial to Team B, regardless of whether Team B attempts to advance the ball.  Note: If a Team B player’s original momentum carries him into his end zone, where the ball is declared dead in his team’s possession, the dead ball spot is considered to be the spot at which the player established possession. See 11-5-1-Exc. 2.  
	.	(c)  Fouls by Team B (Team B impetus):  
(1) Regardless of whether the foul is in the field of play or in the end zone, the result is a safety. 
ARTICLE 5. FOUL COMMITTED DURING PASSING PLAY. If there is a foul by either team from the time of the snap until a forward pass thrown from behind the line ends, the penalty is enforced from the previous spot. A pass play ends and a running play begins at the instant that a pass is caught. 
Exceptions: 
	.	(1)  Intentional grounding is a loss of down at the spot of the foul, or a loss of down and a 10-yard penalty from the previous spot, whichever is less beneficial for the offense. If the foul occurs less than 10 yards behind the line of scrimmage, but more than half the distance to the goal line, the ball shall be placed at the spot of the pass. (If the pass is thrown from the end zone, it is a safety).  
	.	(2)  Pass interference by the defense is enforced at the spot of the foul. If it occurs in the fouling team’s end zone, the ball will be placed at the one-yard line, or half the distance to the goal line from the previous spot, whichever is more beneficial to the offense.  
	.	(3)  It is a safety when the offensive team commits a foul behind its own goal line if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.  
	.	(4)  If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the defense prior to the completion of a forward pass thrown from behind the line, enforcement is from the previous spot or the dead ball spot, whichever is more beneficial to the offense. If the passing team is fouled and subsequently loses possession after a completion, the passing team retains possession of the ball, and enforcement is from the previous spot.  
	.	(5)  If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense prior to the offense losing possession during a pass play or a subsequent running play, enforcement is from the dead ball spot. However, if the defense subsequently loses possession, the penalty is enforced from the spot of the defense's catch or recovery, and the defense retains possession. This also applies to a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense prior to a forward pass thrown from behind the line when the offense fails to make the line to gain.  
Notes: 
55 
	.	(1)  The penalty for a forward pass from behind the line after the ball has been beyond the line, or for a second forward pass from behind the line, is enforced from the previous spot, unless the spot of the pass is behind the passer’s goal line, in which case it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.  
	.	(2)  If a forward pass is thrown from beyond the line of scrimmage, or when there is no line of scrimmage, it is a foul during a running play.  
ARTICLE 6. FOUL DURING A BACKWARD PASS OR FUMBLE. If there is a foul by either team during a backward pass or fumble, the basic spot is the spot of the backward pass or fumble. The three-and-one method of enforcement is used (see Section 3, Article 6). 
Notes: 
	.	(1)  If Team B gains possession in its end zone, and the impetus was provided by Team A, if Team B fumbles or throws a backward pass in the end zone and fouls while the ball is loose, the spot of the fumble or the backward pass is considered to be the B20-yard line, or the 25-yard line if the impetus was from a free kick.  
	.	(2)  If a Team B player’s original momentum carries him into his end zone, where he fumbles the ball, the spot of the fumble is considered to be the spot at which the player established possession. See 11-5-1-Exc. 2.  
	.	(3)  If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense during a fumble or backward pass that is recovered by the defense, enforcement is from the dead ball spot. If the recovering team subsequently loses possession, the penalty is enforced from the spot of its recovery, and it retains possession. This also applies to a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the offense during a fumble or backward pass that is recovered by the offense, and the offense fails to make the line to gain.  
ARTICLE 7. FOUL DURING FREE KICK PLAY. If there is a foul during a free kick, enforcement is from the previous spot, and the free kick is made again. However, if the kicking team commits a foul prior to the end of the kick, and the receiving team retains possession throughout the down, it will have the option of enforcing the penalty at the previous spot and replaying the down or adding the penalty yardage to the dead ball spot. The dead ball spot for free kicks that result in a touchback is the 25-yard line. 
Exceptions: 
(a) A personal foul (blocking) after a fair catch signal is enforced from the spot of the foul. (b) A foul for fair catch interference is enforced from the spot of the foul. (c) A foul for interference with the opportunity to make a catch is enforced from the spot of the foul. (d) A foul for an invalid fair catch signal is enforced from the spot of the foul. (e) A foul for intentionally forming an illegal wedge during the free kick, is enforced from the spot of the foul, or the previous 
spot if the foul occurs in the end zone during the kick. (f) For a free kick out of bounds, see 6-2-3. (g) For a free kick illegally touched, see 6-2-4. 
Note: In (1), (2), (3), and (5) above, if the foul is not part of a double foul and the opponent has possession at the end of the down, the foul may be enforced from the dead ball spot. See 14-2-4. 
A free kick ends when Team B establishes possession. Fouls by Team A prior to the time that Team B establishes possession are offensive fouls. If Team A legally recovers a free kick, there is no change of possession. After Team B establishes possession, a running play begins, and fouls that occur thereafter are enforced from the dead ball spot or the spot of the foul (three-and-one method). 
ARTICLE 8. FOUL DURING SCRIMMAGE KICK PLAY. If there is a foul from the time of the snap until a legal scrimmage kick ends, enforcement is from the previous spot. This includes a foul during a run prior to a legal kick, and a foul by the kicking team during a missed field goal attempt. 
Exceptions: 
	.	(1)  If the offensive team commits a foul in its own end zone, it is a safety if the defense elects to enforce the penalty at that spot.  
	.	(2)  Unless the kick is a missed field goal attempt, if there is a foul by the kicking team, and the receiving team retains possession throughout the down, the receiving team will have the option of taking the penalty at the previous spot and replaying the down, or adding the penalty yardage on to the dead ball spot.  Notes:  (a) The dead ball spot for scrimmage kicks that result in a touchback is the 20-yard line. (b) If there is a foul for an illegal touch inside the five-yard line, the receiving team also has the option of accepting a  touchback. (c) If there is a personal foul or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the kicking team during a missed field goal attempt  where the receiving team is awarded the ball (see 11-4-2), enforcement is from the succeeding spot.  
	.	(3)  Fair catch interference, interference with the opportunity to make a catch, an invalid fair catch signal, or a personal foul (blocking) after a fair catch signal are enforced from the spot of the foul.  Note: If the foul is not part of a double foul and the opponent has possession at the end of the down, the foul may be enforced from the dead ball spot. See 14-2-4.  
	.	(4)  Except for fouls that are committed in an attempt to block the kick (such as running into or roughing the kicker, defensive holding (pull-and-shoot), leverage, leaping, and pushing teammate(s) into the offensive formation), if the receiving team commits a foul after the kick crosses the line of scrimmage, the penalty for its infraction will be enforced as if it had been  
56 
in possession of the ball at the time the foul occurred (a post-possession foul), provided that the receiving team does not lose possession of the ball at any time during the down. The penalty shall be enforced from whichever of the following spots is least beneficial to the receiving team: 
	.	(a)  the end of the kick; or  
	.	(b)  the spot of the foul.  
If the foul occurs in the end zone, it is deemed to have occurred at the 20-yard line, unless enforcement results in a safety (14-4-4). 
(5) For enforcement of a personal or unsportsmanlike conduct foul on a play that results in a score, see 14-2-3; for an illegal bat, see 12-5-1; and for illegally kicking a loose ball, see 12-5-2. 
When Team B establishes possession of the ball, a scrimmage kick ends, and a running play begins, and fouls that occur thereafter are enforced from the dead ball spot or the spot of the foul (three-and-one method, 14-3-6). 
ARTICLE 9. DEAD BALL FOUL AND FOUL BETWEEN DOWNS. A dead ball foul is a foul that occurs in the continuing action after a down ends, or a taunting foul that occurs at any time. If the foul occurs simultaneously with the ball becoming dead, it is considered a dead ball foul. The penalty for a dead ball foul is enforced from the succeeding spot, and the down counts. 
A foul between downs is a foul that occurs after the end of the down and after any continuing action resulting from the down, but prior to the next snap or free kick. The penalty for a foul between downs is enforced from the succeeding spot, and the down counts, but it cannot be combined with a live ball foul or a dead ball foul to create a multiple or double foul. A foul between downs is always enforced separately from any other foul. A foul against an official, regardless of when it occurs, is always treated as a foul between downs. See 12-3-1-e-pen. 
Exception: If there is a personal, unsportsmanlike conduct, or taunting foul by either team following the end of the second or fourth periods, the penalty yardage will be enforced on the second-half kickoff or the kickoff in overtime, unless it is part of a double foul (See Section 5). 
Item 1. Dead Ball Foul by Team A. If there is a dead ball foul by Team A after a down in which Team A has made a first down, after enforcement of the penalty it will be first-and-10 for Team A. If there is a foul between downs after a down in which Team A has made a first down, after enforcement of the penalty it will be first-and-25 for Team A. 
Item 2. Dead Ball Fouls by Both Teams. Dead ball fouls by both teams are offset at the succeeding spot, and the down counts, but any disqualified player or players must be removed pursuant to Rule 5, Section 2, Article 7. 
Item 3. Live Ball and Dead Ball Fouls. Live ball fouls and dead ball fouls combine to create double fouls or multiple fouls, and all customary rules for enforcement apply. 
Exceptions: 
(1) If there is a 5-yard vs. 15-yard double foul on the last play of a half, and the 15-yard penalty is for a dead ball foul (personal, unsportsmanlike conduct, or taunting) by either team, the penalty yardage will be enforced on the second half kickoff or the kickoff to start overtime. There will be no extension of the period. 
	.	(2)  If the scoring team commits a dead ball foul after a score, and its opponent’s live ball foul is not for unsportsmanlike conduct or unnecessary roughness, the opponent’s foul is disregarded, the score counts, and the offensive team’s dead ball foul is enforced on the succeeding kickoff or Try. If the opponent’s foul is for unsportsmanlike conduct or unnecessary roughness, the score counts, and the fouls offset on the kickoff.  
	.	(3)  If the only foul by the defense is a dead ball foul on the last play of the half (“clean hands end of half”). If the foul by the offense is not for unnecessary roughness or unsportsmanlike conduct, it is disregarded, and the dead ball foul for unnecessary roughness or unsportsmanlike conduct foul by the defense will be enforced on the second half kickoff or to start overtime. If both teams’ fouls are for unnecessary roughness or unsportsmanlike conduct, those fouls offset at the end of the down.  
SECTION 5 FOULS BY BOTH TEAMS (DOUBLE FOULS) 
ARTICLE 1. DOUBLE FOUL WITHOUT CHANGE OF POSSESSION. If there is a double foul (3-14-1-e) during a down in which there is not a change of possession, the penalties are offset, and the down is replayed at the previous spot. If it is a scrimmage down, the number of the next down and the line to gain is the same as for the down in which the fouls occurred. Penalties for double fouls cannot be declined by either team. 
Exceptions: 
	.	(1)  If one or more fouls by one team includes a 15-yard penalty, and the penalty for the foul or fouls committed by the other team is for a five-yard penalty without an automatic First Down, a loss of down, or a 10-second runoff (15 yards versus five yards), or that is not a spot foul, the 15-yard penalty is enforced from the previous spot, and the five-yard penalty is disregarded. Five vs. 15 enforcement cannot be declined by the team that committed the minor foul, except as described in (2) below. See 4-8-2-h and 14-4-9-Item 3-Exc. 1 for dead ball fouls at the end of a half.  
	.	(2)  If one of the fouls is a dead ball foul for delay of game for spiking the ball and the opponent’s foul is a live ball foul, the team that committed the delay of game foul, in addition to Article 1 above, will have the option to decline the foul committed by its opponent and be assessed the penalty for delay from the dead ball spot.  
	.	(3)  If both fouls are dead ball fouls or are treated as such (14-4-9), the penalties are offset, and the ball is next put in play at the succeeding spot, unless the dead ball fouls occur after the ball has been made ready for play, in which case 5 vs. 15 enforcement applies.  
	.	(4)  14-4-9-Item 3 exceptions for dead ball fouls at the end of a half or after a score.  
57 
ARTICLE 2. DOUBLE FOUL WITH A CHANGE OF POSSESSION. If there is a double foul during a down in which there is a change or changes of possession, including if one of the fouls is a post-possession foul by Team B during a scrimmage kick, the team last gaining possession will keep the ball after enforcement for its foul, provided it did not foul prior to last gaining possession (“clean hands”). 
Exceptions: 
	.	(1)  If Team A fouls during a kickoff, punt, safety kick, fair catch kick, or field goal attempt prior to the change of possession, Team B may elect to replay the down at the previous spot.  
	.	(2)  If a safety results from the enforcement of a foul by Team B, the down is replayed at the previous spot.  
	.	(3)  If both teams foul after the last change of possession (double foul after change of possession), the penatlies are offset, and the team last in possession shall retain the ball at the spot where its foul would be enforced if it was the only foul. If the spot is normally a touchback, the ball is placed on the 20-yard line, or the 25-yard line if the impetus was from a free kick. If it is normally a safety, the ball is placed on the one-yard line. On kicking plays, if Team A also fouled prior to the change of  possession, Team B shall also have the option in (1) above.  
If the team last in possession does not have “clean hands” when it establishes possession, the penalties offset, and the down is replayed at the previous spot. 
58 
RULE 15 INSTANT REPLAY 
SECTION 1 INITIATING A REPLAY REVIEW 
ARTICLE 1. COACH CHALLENGES. Each team is permitted two challenges that will initiate Instant Replay reviews: (a) The head coach can initiate a challenge by throwing a red flag onto the field of play before the next legal snap or kick. (b) A team that commits a foul that prevents the next snap can no longer challenge the previous play. The non-fouling team 
can still challenge the previous play, and both teams can benefit from the review. (c) The head coach may challenge on-field rulings listed in Section 3, except for those plays that only the Replay Official can 
challenge (Article 2). (d) Each challenge requires an available team timeout. A team that is out of timeouts, or has used all its available challenges, 
may not attempt to initiate a challenge. 
A team that initiates a challenge when the team is not permitted to challenge will be charged a team timeout. 
Penalty: For initiating a challenge when a team has exhausted its timeouts: Loss of 15 yards enforced as a foul between downs. 
	.	(e)  If a challenge is unsuccessful, the team will be charged a timeout.  
	.	(f)  A team will be permitted a third challenge if it is successful on both of its challenges. A fourth challenge will not be  permitted.  
ARTICLE 2. REPLAY OFFICIAL REQUEST FOR REVIEW. Only the Replay Official or the Senior Vice President of Officiating or his or her designee may initiate a review of a play: (a) that begins after the two-minute warning of each half; (b) throughout any overtime period; 
(c) when points are scored by either team; (d) that is a Try attempt (successful or unsuccessful); and (e) when on-field officials rule: 
(1) an interception by an opponent; (2) a fumble or backward pass recovered by an opponent or that goes out of bounds through the opponent’s end zone; (3) that the offense failed to reach the line to gain on fourth down; (4) possession by the kicking team at the end of any free kick or scrimmage kick down; or (5) a disqualification of a player. 
Such plays may be reviewed regardless of whether a foul is committed on the play that, if accepted, would negate the on-field ruling. 
The Replay Official may only challenge a play until the next legal snap or kick. The Replay Official may consult with a designated member of the Officiating department at the League office regarding whether to challenge a play. 
SECTION 2 REPLAY REVIEWS 
All Replay Reviews will be conducted by the Senior Vice President of Officiating or his or her designee. Reviews are conducted in consultation with the Replay Official and the Referee, who will have access to a field-level video monitor. 
ARTICLE 1. CHANGING A RULING. An on-field ruling will be changed only when the Senior Vice President of Officiating or his or her designee determines that clear and obvious video evidence warrants a change. 
ARTICLE 2. LENGTH OF REVIEW. A decision must be made within 60 seconds from when video is shared with the Referee on the field. 
ARTICLE 3. SCOPE OF REVIEW. Once a review is initiated, all reviewable aspects of a play (Section 3) may be examined and are subject to change, even if not the specific reason for the challenge. 
ARTICLE 4. AWARDING POSSESSION. When the on-field ruling results in a dead ball (e.g., score, down by contact, incomplete pass, etc.), and following replay review it is determined that possession was lost before the ball should have been ruled dead, possession may be awarded to a player who clearly recovers a loose ball in the immediate continuing action. A loose ball that touches out of bounds is deemed a clear recovery by the player who last possessed the ball. 
Note: If on-field officials make a preliminary ruling of which team recovered the ball, that preliminary ruling may constitute a clear recovery. 
ARTICLE 5. EACH RULING REVIEWED SEPARATELY. Any aspect of a ruling that is not changed will be considered a correct ruling for purposes of reviewing the play. 
SECTION 3 REVIEWABLE RULINGS 
ARTICLE 1. PLAY SITUATIONS. The Replay System will cover the following play situations: (a) Plays involving possession (see Section 3, Article 2). (b) Plays involving touching of either the ball or the ground (see Section 3, Article 3). (c) Plays governed by the goal line (see Section 3, Article 4). 
(d) Plays governed by the boundary lines (see Section 3, Article 5). (e) Plays governed by the line of scrimmage (see Section 3, Article 6). (f) Plays governed by the line to gain (see Section 3, Article 7). (g) Number of players on the field (see Section 3, Article 8). (h) Game administration (see Section 3, Article 9). 
(1) Penalty enforcement. 
59 
(2) Proper down. (3) Spot of a foul. (4) Status of the game clock. 
	.	(i)  Disqualification of a player (see Section 3, Article 10).  
	.	(j)  Other reviewable plays (see Section 3, Article 11).  
ARTICLE 2. PLAYS INVOLVING POSSESSION. Item 1. Completion of a Pass. Whether a pass was complete or incomplete. 
Notes: (1) Incomplete Changed to Catch. If a ruling of incomplete is changed to a catch, the ball will be placed at the spot where 
it was when the receiver’s second foot or a body part touched the ground with control. No advance is awarded. 
(2) Incomplete Changed to Catch and Fumble. When a ruling of incomplete is changed to a catch and fumble, the ball will be awarded at the spot of recovery to the team that recovers the ball in the immediate continuing action. If there is no clear recovery, the ball will be awarded to the team last in possession at the spot where possession was lost. 
Item 2. Recovery of a Loose Ball. Whether a player legally recovered a loose ball in the field of play, at the sideline, goal line, or in the end zone. 
Item 3. Forward Pass or Fumble. Whether a passer’s hand started forward with control of the ball, or whether the ball was fumbled. 
Notes: 
(1) When an on-field ruling is incomplete, and the passer clearly fumbled the ball, the ball will be awarded at the spot of recovery to the team that recovers the ball in the immediate continuing action. If there is no clear recovery, the ball will be awarded to the team last in possession at the spot where possession was lost, except that if possession was lost in the team’s own end zone, and the ball was not clearly recovered in the end zone, the ball will be placed at the one-yard line. 
	.	(2)  When a ruling of fumble is changed to an incomplete forward pass, a foul for intentional grounding can be created in replay only if a pre-review announcement was made that a changed ruling would create the foul.  
	.	(3)  This item applies to a ruling that a passer muffed a snap or spiked the ball to stop a running clock.  
Item 4. Fumble. Whether a runner lost possession before he was down by contact, or had given himself up. 
Notes: 
(1) When an on-field ruling is down by contact, and the runner clearly fumbled the ball, the ball will be awarded at the spot of recovery to the team that recovers the ball in the immediate continuing action. If there is no clear recovery, the ruling on the field stands. 
(2) The spot of a forward fumble out of bounds, or a fumble that occurs on fourth down, or after the two-minute warning, or during a Try, is reviewable regardless of whether on-field officials return the ball to the spot of the fumble, and regardless of whether it involves a score, potential score, a change of possession, or the line to gain. 
ARTICLE 3. PLAYS INVOLVING TOUCHING OF EITHER THE BALL OR THE GROUND. Item 1. Down by Contact. Whether a player was down by contact while in possession of the ball. Item 2. Touching of a Forward Pass. Whether a player touched a forward pass. 
Notes: 
(1) Only the fact of touching, and not intent, is reviewable. (2) A player touching a pass will remove a foul for offensive or defensive pass interference if the touching occurs away from 
and noticeably before the interference. 
Item 3. Touching of a Kick. Whether a player touched a kick and the spot of touching. 
Note: A foul for running into or roughing the kicker or holder can be removed if the kicked ball was touched before the contact. If a pre-review announcement was made that there was no foul because the ball was ruled to be touched, a foul for running into or roughing the kicker or holder can be created in replay if the ball was not touched before the contact. 
Item 4. Touching of a Loose Ball. Whether a player touched a loose ball. Item 5. Ball Touching the Ground on a Free Kick. Whether a ball hit the ground after being kicked. 
Item 6. Ball Touching the Ground on a Scrimmage Kick. Whether a ball touched the ground before being caught or recovered by a punter or holder. 
ARTICLE 4. PLAYS GOVERNED BY THE GOAL LINE. Item 1. Ball breaking the plane of the goal line. Whether any part of the ball broke the plane of the goal line while in player 
possession and before the ball should have been declared dead. 
Notes: 
(1) A ruling of a touchdown can be reviewed to determine if the runner fumbled before the ball broke the plane of the goal line. If there is no clear recovery in the immediate continuing action, the team that fumbled is awarded the ball at the spot of the fumble. 
(2) The dead ball spot is not reviewable to determine solely whether it should be closer to or further from the goal line. 
60 
Item 2. Momentum. Whether a player’s momentum spot was in the field of play or in the end zone (Rule 11-5-1-b, exc. 2). A ruling of whether a player’s momentum caused him to enter his end zone is not reviewable. 
Note: For purposes of a replay review, the momentum spot is the spot where the second foot (or other body part other than the hands) touched the ground. If that spot is on the goal line or in the end zone, it is a touchback. 
ARTICLE 5. PLAYS GOVERNED BY THE BOUNDARY LINES. 
Item 1. Runner Inbounds. A ruling that a runner was out of bounds is reviewable only to determine: (a) the spot of the ball in relation to the line to gain or the goal line at the spot where the runner was ruled to have touched out of bounds; (b) if the runner fumbled the ball before taking two additional steps beyond the spot where he was ruled out of bounds; or (c) if the ball broke the plane of the goal line in the runner’s possession before taking two additional steps beyond the spot where he was ruled out of bounds. 
Item 2. Receiver Out of Bounds. Whether a receiver touched out of bounds is reviewable to determine whether he was eligible to touch the ball and whether a defender could legally contact him. 
Item 3. Passer Out of Bounds Before Throwing Pass. A ruling that a player stepped out of bounds before throwing a pass is not reviewable to determine if he was inbounds when he threw the pass. 
Item 4. Player Out of Bounds on Scrimmage Kick. Whether a player was out of bounds during a scrimmage kick is reviewable to determine the spot of the ball and whether the ball was illegally touched. 
Item 5. Loose Ball. Whether a loose ball touched a boundary line, anything on the boundary line, a pylon, or an object. Note: Ball That Does Not Touch a Boundary Line. If an on-field ruling that a loose ball touched a boundary line is 
changed, possession can be awarded to a team that recovers the loose ball in the immediate continuing action. 
ARTICLE 6. PLAYS GOVERNED BY THE LINE OF SCRIMMAGE. Item 1. Illegal Passes. Whether a forward pass was thrown when the passer was beyond the line of scrimmage, or after the ball 
had crossed the line of scrimmage and returned behind it. Rule 8-1-2, Item 1. 
Item 2. Illegal Kick. Whether a scrimmage kick was from beyond the line of scrimmage, or a second kick was made after the ball had crossed the line of scrimmage. Rule 9-1-1. 
ARTICLE 7. PLAYS GOVERNED BY THE LINE TO GAIN. The dead ball spot is reviewable to determine whether it was short of, at, or beyond the line to gain. 
Notes: 
(1) For purposes of a replay review, forward progress is determined when a player with control of the ball is contacted by an opponent and driven backwards. 
	.	(2)  A challenge is successful only if the ruling of whether a new series was awarded is changed, regardless of whether the ball was moved closer to the line to gain.  
	.	(3)  Following review, the ball will be placed at the correct dead ball spot, but the challenge will be successful only if the line to gain ruling is changed.  
ARTICLE 8. NUMBER OF PLAYERS ON THE FIELD. Whether a player is on the field at the snap or when officials rule a dead ball foul for too many players in formation. For a player to be off the field, he must touch the ground out of bounds. For a player to be on the field, both feet or a body part must touch the ground in the field of play. 
ARTICLE 9. GAME ADMINISTRATION AND CONSULTATION. The Replay Official and designated members of the Officiating department may consult with on-field officials, or conduct a replay review, or advise the game officials on specific, objective aspects of a play when clear and obvious video evidence is present, and/or to address game administration issues, including, but not limited to: 
(a) penalty enforcement; (b) the proper down; (c) spot of a foul; (d) the game clock; 
(e) possession; (f) completed or intercepted pass; (g) touching of a loose ball, boundary line, goal line, or end line; (h) location of the football or a player in relation to a boundary line, the line of scrimmage, the line to gain, the goal line, or 
the pocket; or (i) down by contact (when a player is not ruled down by contact on the field). 
Nothing in this Article precludes a head coach or Replay Official from initiating a challenge or review otherwise allowed under Rule 15, Section 1. 
Item 1. Game Clock. The game clock is reviewable for purposes of restoring time to the clock but not for purposes of taking time off the clock. 
Notes: 
(1) Time can be restored to the game clock if the clock operator incorrectly starts the game clock when it should remain stopped, provided that the correction occurs before the next legal snap or kick. 
(2) An on-field ruling that time expired during or after the last play of any half, or of an overtime period in the preseason or regular season, or of an overtime half in the postseason, is reviewable by the Replay Official only when the visual 
61 
evidence demonstrates that the clock should have stopped with two or more seconds remaining. In the first half, time shall be restored only if the additional play will be a snap from scrimmage. In the second half, time shall be restored only if the next play will be a snap from scrimmage by a team that is trailing by eight points or less, or by either team if the score is tied. 
(3) The game clock is reviewable to determine if it properly expired when on-field officials restore time after the last play of any half, or of an overtime period in the preseason or regular season, or of an overtime half in the postseason. Visual evidence that a clock should have stopped includes any situation when the clock stops by rule after the ball becomes dead. Visual evidence that the clock should have stopped for a team timeout occurs when an official starts to raise his or her arm to signal a stopped clock. 
ARTICLE 10. DISQUALIFICATION OF A PLAYER. The Senior Vice President of Officiating or his or her designee may review a decision by on-field officials to disqualify a player. When reviewing a disqualification under this Article other reviewable aspects of the play will not be reviewed unless the Replay Official would otherwise have authority to challenge the play, or it is challenged by a head coach. 
ARTICLE 11. OTHER REVIEWABLE PLAYS. Item 1. Direction of a Pass. Whether a pass was forward or backward. 
Note: When an on-field ruling is incomplete, and the pass was clearly backward, the ball will be awarded at the spot of recovery to the team that recovers the ball in the immediate continuing action. If there is no clear recovery, the ball will be awarded to the team last in possession at the spot where possession was lost. 
Item 2. Illegal Forward Pass. Whether a pass was illegally thrown. Item 3. Field Goal or Try Attempt. Whether a field goal or Try attempt crossed above the crossbar and inside the uprights is 
reviewable, but only if the ball crosses the plane of the goal post below the top of the uprights, or if the ball touches anything. Item 4. Illegal Forward Handoff. Whether a player received a handoff clearly in advance of a player making the handoff. Item 5. Ball Touching a Foreign Object. Whether a loose ball touched a scoreboard, guide wire, or any other object. 
Notes: 
(1) The Replay Official can initiate a challenge for this item at any time during the game. 
(2) If it is determined that the ball hit an object, the down will be replayed from the previous spot, and the game clock will be reset to the time when the ball was snapped and will start on the snap. 
SECTION 4 NON-REVIEWABLE PLAYS 
The following aspects of plays are not reviewable: (a) Whether an erroneous whistle sounded; (b) Whether a ball was illegally batted or kicked; (c) Whether a passer intentionally grounded a pass; (d) Whether an ineligible receiver was downfield before a pass; (e) Whether a receiver was illegally contacted; 
(f) The spot of a loose ball crossing the sideline; (g) Whether a block was illegal; and (h) Any aspect of a play not listed as reviewable in Section 3 of this Rule. 
SECTION 5 GAME CLOCK ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE 1. RESETTING GAME CLOCK. When a ruling is changed in replay, the clock status following review is determined by Rule 4-3, and the game clock will be reset to the time when the ball should have been declared dead. The game clock is not reset if the on-field ruling is not changed in replay. 
ARTICLE 2. 10-SECOND RUNOFF. When a changed ruling results in a running clock, or a clock that would have otherwise restarted before the next snap, for plays that begin after the two-minute warning, the clock is reset to the time when the play should have ended, and the clock will run for 10 seconds from the reset time. If less than 10 seconds remain in the half or the game, the half or the game is over. 
Note: Neither team may decline a 10-second runoff under this Article, but either team can avoid the 10-second runoff by taking a charged team timeout. If the 10-second runoff is avoided, the game clock will be reset to the time when the play should have ended and will start on the snap. 
SECTION 6 TIMEOUTS FOLLOWING CHALLENGE 
ARTICLE 1. UNSUCCESSFUL CHALLENGE. A team that makes an unsuccessful challenge is charged a team timeout. If a team takes a team timeout and then unsuccessfully challenges a play, it is charged a second timeout. A challenge is considered successful if any reviewable aspect of the play is changed. 
ARTICLE 2. CHARGED TIMEOUT. A charged timeout taken after the two-minute warning of either half with the clock running will be restored if a review changes the ruling and the new ruling results in a stopped clock. An injury timeout can be charged or restored if a ruling changed in replay would affect whether an injury timeout is charged. 
SECTION 7 FOULS 
ARTICLE 1. PENALTY ADMINISTRATION. Penalty administration, including the number of the down, yardage, the number of the fouling player, and the spot of a foul, is reviewable. 
62 
ARTICLE 2. FOUL NULLIFIED BY A CHANGED RULING. A foul will be nullified when a necessary aspect of the foul is changed in replay. A foul can be created following a review if the reviewable aspect creates the foul, or if the Referee announced before the review that there was no foul on the play because of a specific ruling that is changed in the review. 
ARTICLE 3. ENFORCEMENT OF FOULS FOLLOWING A CHANGED RULING 
Item 1. Major Fouls. When a ruling is changed in replay, any foul that occurred after the ball should have been declared dead is disregarded except for personal fouls and unsportsmanlike conduct fouls. Live ball fouls that occurred on the challenged play may be enforced if they occurred before the ball should have been declared dead. 
Item 2. Pre-Snap Fouls Before Challenge. Pre-snap fouls, other than personal fouls and unsportsmanlike conduct fouls, that occur before a replay review will be ignored if the ruling on the previous play is changed. 
Item 3. Head Coach’s Ability to Change Penalty Decision. If a ruling is changed in replay, a head coach can change a decision whether to accept or decline a penalty that was made before the review. 
SECTION 8 LOSS OF COMMUNICATION 
If communications between the officials and the League office are lost, the Referee will stay at the on-field monitor for one minute while communications are being restored. If communications are not restored within one minute, the Referee will conduct the replay review in consultation with the Replay Official. If communications are restored during the review, the League office will review the play as normal. 
63 
RULE 16 OVERTIME PROCEDURES 
SECTION 1 OVERTIME PROCEDURES 
ARTICLE 1. SCORE TIED. If the score is tied at the end of the regulation playing time of all regular season and postseason NFL games, a system of modified sudden-death overtime shall be in effect, pursuant to the following. 
ARTICLE 2. END OF REGULATION. At the end of regulation playing time, the Referee shall immediately toss a coin at the center of the field, in accordance with rules pertaining to a usual pregame toss (4-2-2). The visiting team captain is to again call the toss. 
ARTICLE 3. OVERTIME IN REGULAR SEASON. Following an intermission of no more than three minutes after the end of a regular game, an extra period of 10 minutes shall commence. The following shall apply: 
	.	(a)  Both teams must have the opportunity to possess the ball once during the extra period, unless the team that receives the  opening kickoff scores a touchdown on its initial possession, in which case it is the winner, or if the team kicking off to start the overtime period scores a safety on the receiving team’s initial possession, in which case the team that kicked off is the winner. If a touchdown is scored, the game is over, and the Try is not attempted.  
	.	(b)  If the team that possesses the ball first does not score on its initial possession, the team next scoring by any method shall be the winner.  
	.	(c)  If the team that possesses the ball first scores a field goal on its initial possession, the other team (the second team) shall have the opportunity to possess the ball. (1) If the second team scores a touchdown on its possession, it is the winner. (2) If the second team scores a field goal on its possession, the team next scoring by any method shall be the winner.  (3) If the second team does not score on its possession, the game is over, and the first team is the winner, subject to Article 5(a) below.  
	.	(d)  There shall be a maximum of one 10-minute period, even if the second team has not had an opportunity to possess the ball or if its initial possession has not ended. If the score is tied at the end of the period, the game shall result in a tie  
	.	(e)  Each team shall be entitled to two timeouts, and if there is an excess timeout, the usual rules shall apply (see 4-5). The general provisions for the fourth quarter of a game, including timing, shall apply.  
ARTICLE 4. OVERTIME IN POSTSEASON. Following an intermission of no more than three minutes after the end of the regular game, an extra period of 15 minutes shall commence. The following shall apply: 
	.	(a)  Both teams must have the opportunity to possess the ball at least once during the extra period, unless the team kicking off to start the overtime period scores a safety on the receiving team’s initial possession, in which case the team that kicked off is the winner.  
	.	(b)  After each team has had an opportunity to possess the ball, if one team has more points than its opponent, it is the winner, subject to Article 5(a) below.  
	.	(c)  If the team that possesses the ball first does not score on its initial possession, or if the score is tied after each team has had its opportunity to possess the ball, the team next scoring by any method shall be the winner.  
	.	(d)  If the score is tied at the end of a 15-minute overtime period, or if the second team’s initial possession has not ended, another overtime period will begin, and play will continue, regardless of how many 15-minute periods are necessary.  
	.	(e)  Between each overtime period, there shall be a two-minute intermission, but there shall be no halftime intermission after the second period. At the beginning of the third overtime period, the captain who lost the coin toss prior to the first overtime period shall have the first choice of the two privileges in 4-2-2, unless the team that won the coin toss deferred.  
	.	(f)  At the end of the first and third extra periods, etc., teams must change goals in accordance with 4-2-3.  
	.	(g)  Each team is entitled to three timeouts during a half. If there is an excess timeout, the usual rules shall apply (see 4-5).  
	.	(h)  At the end of a second overtime period, timing rules shall apply as at the end of the first half. At the end of a fourth overtime  period, timing rules shall apply as at the end of the fourth period.  
	.	(i)  At the end of a fourth overtime period, there will be another coin toss pursuant to Section 1, Article 2, and play will continue  until a winner is declared.  
ARTICLE 5. GENERAL RULES APPLICABLE TO OVERTIME. The following applies in both the regular season and postseason. 
(a) If the first team to possess the ball scores a field goal or touchdown, after which the second team loses possession by an interception or fumble, the down will be permitted to run to its conclusion, and all rules of the game will be enforced as customary, including awarding points scored by either team during the down. Only fouls that require the down to be replayed, fouls that negate a score, or palpably unfair acts will be enforced. 
Notes: 
	.	(1)  In such situations, if the player who intercepts the pass or recovers the fumble goes to the ground and makes no effort to advance, the covering official will blow his whistle to end the game.  
	.	(2)  If the second team loses possession by an interception or fumble, but the opponent committed a foul prior to the change of possession, the second team’s possession has not legally ended, and the game cannot end on the down. However, in certain situations, the second team cannot decline the penalty and accept the result of the play, or accept a penalty enforcement, if it would create a second possession for itself. In that situation, it can only accept an enforcement that extends its initial possession.  
	.	(3)  The situation in (2) may also affect the team that receives the opening kickoff during its first possession. If there is a foul by the second team followed by a double change of possession, and the first team accepts the result of the play, the second team has had its required possession, and the first team has possession of the ball for the second time. However, if it accepts the penalty, it will extend its initial possession.  
64 
	.	(b)  A player is in possession when he has a firm grip and control of the ball inbounds (3-2-7). The defense gains possession when it catches, intercepts, or recovers a loose ball.  
	.	(c)  The opportunity to possess applies only during kicking plays. A kickoff is the opportunity to possess for the receiving team. If the kicking team legally recovers the kick, the receiving team is considered to have had its opportunity. A punt or field goal attempt that crosses the line of scrimmage and is muffed by the receiving team is considered to be an opportunity to possess for the receiving team. Normal touching rules by the kicking team apply.  
	.	(d)  All replay reviews will be initiated by the Replay Official. Coaches’ challenges will not be allowed.  
	.	(e)  Disqualified player(s) shall not re-enter during any extra period or periods.  
	.	(f)  Except as provided for above, all other general and specific rules shall apply.  
65 
RULE 17 EMERGENCIES, UNFAIR ACTS 
SECTION 1 EMERGENCIES 
ARTICLE 1. NON-PLAYER ON FIELD. If any non-player, including photographers, reporters, employees, police or spectators, enters the field of play or end zones, and in the judgment of an official said party or parties interfere with the play, the Referee, after consulting the crew (13-1-7 and 19-1-3), shall enforce any such penalty or score as the interference warrants. 
ARTICLE 2. FIELD CONTROL. If spectators enter the field and/or interfere with the progress of the game in such a manner that in the opinion of the Referee the game cannot continue, the Referee shall declare timeout. In such a case, the Referee shall record the number of the down, distance to be gained, and the position of the ball on the field. The Referee shall also secure from the Line Judge the playing time remaining and record it. The Referee shall then order the home club through its management to have the field cleared, and when it is cleared and order restored and the safety of the spectators, players and officials is assured to the satisfaction of the Referee, the game must continue even if it is necessary to use lights. 
ARTICLE 3. GAME CALLED. If the game must be called due to a state or municipal law, or by darkness if no lights are available, an immediate report shall be made to the Commissioner by the home club, visiting club, and officials. On receipt of all reports, the Commissioner shall make a decision which will be final. 
ARTICLE 4. EMERGENCY SITUATIONS. The NFL affirms the position that in most circumstances all regular season and postseason games should be played to their conclusion. If, in the opinion of appropriate League authorities, it is impossible to begin or continue a game due to an emergency, or a game is deemed to be imminently threatened by any such emergency (e.g., severely inclement weather, lightning, flooding, power failure), the following procedures (Articles 5 through 11) will serve as guidelines for the Commissioner and/or the duly appointed representatives. The Commissioner has the authority to review the circumstances of each emergency and to adjust the following procedures in whatever manner the Commissioner deems appropriate. If, in the Commissioner’s opinion, it is reasonable to project that the resumption of an interrupted game would not change its ultimate result or adversely affect any other inter-team competitive issue, the Commissioner is empowered to terminate the game. 
ARTICLE 5. LEAGUE AUTHORITY. The League employees vested with the authority to define emergencies under these procedures are the Commissioner, designated representatives from the League office staff, and the game Referee. In those instances where neither the Commissioner nor the designated representative is in attendance at a game, the Referee will have sole authority; provided, however, that if the Referee delays the beginning of or interrupts a game for a significant period of time due to an emergency, the Referee must make every effort to contact the Commissioner or the Commissioner’s designated representative for consultation. In all cases of significant delay, the League authorities will consult with the management of the participating clubs and will attempt to obtain appropriate information from outside sources, if applicable (e.g., weather bureau, police). 
ARTICLE 6. LATER DATE. If, because of an emergency, a regular season or postseason game is not started at its scheduled time and cannot be played at any later time that same day, the game nevertheless must be played on a subsequent date to be determined by the Commissioner. 
ARTICLE 7. PRE-GAME THREAT. If there is deemed to be a threat of an emergency that may occur during the playing of a game (e.g., an incoming tropical storm), the starting time of such game will not be moved to an earlier time unless there is clearly sufficient time to make an orderly change. 
ARTICLE 8. INTERRUPTED GAME. If, under emergency circumstances, an interrupted regular season or post season game cannot be completed on the same day, such game will be rescheduled by the Commissioner and resumed at that point. 
ARTICLE 9. ALTERNATE DATES, SITES. In instances under these emergency procedures which require the Commissioner to reschedule a regular season game, the Commissioner will make every effort to set the game for no later than two days after its originally scheduled date, and will attempt to schedule the game at its original site. If unable to do so, the Commissioner will schedule it at the nearest available facility. If it is impossible to schedule the game within two days after its original date, the Commissioner will be guided by the Emergencies and Unfair Acts provisions in the Policy Manual for Member Clubs: Game Operations. 
ARTICLE 10. POSTSEASON INTERRUPTION. If an emergency interrupts a postseason game and such game cannot be resumed on that same date, the Commissioner will make every effort to arrange for its completion as soon as possible. If unable to schedule the game at the same site, the Commissioner will select an appropriate alternate site. The Commissioner will terminate the game short of completion only, if in the Commissioner’s judgment, the continuation of the game would not be normally expected to alter the ultimate result. 
ARTICLE 11. GAME RESUMPTION. In all instances where a game is resumed after interruption, either on the same date or a subsequent date, the resumption will begin at the point at which the game was interrupted. At the time of interruption, the Referee will call timeout and will make a record of the following: the team possessing the ball, direction in which its offense was headed, position of the ball on the field, down, distance, period, time remaining in the period, and any other pertinent information required for an efficient and equitable resumption of play. 
SECTION 2 EXTRAORDINARILY UNFAIR ACTS 
ARTICLE 1. COMMISSIONER AUTHORITY. The Commissioner has the sole authority to investigate and take appropriate disciplinary and/or corrective measures if any club action, non-participant interference, or calamity occurs in an NFL game which the Commissioner deems so extraordinarily unfair or outside the accepted tactics encountered in professional football that such action has a major effect on the result of the game. 
ARTICLE 2. NO CLUB PROTESTS. The authority and measures provided for in this entire Section 2 do not constitute a protest machinery for NFL clubs to avail themselves of in the event a dispute arises over the result of a game. The investigation called 
66 
for in this Section 2 will be conducted solely on the Commissioner’s initiative to review an act or occurrence that the Commissioner deems so extraordinary or unfair that the result of the game in question would be inequitable to one of the participating teams. The Commissioner will not apply authority in cases of complaints by clubs concerning judgmental errors or routine errors of omission by game officials. Games involving such complaints will continue to stand as completed. 
ARTICLE 3. PENALTIES FOR UNFAIR ACTS. The Commissioner’s powers under this Section 2 include the imposition of monetary fines and draft-choice forfeitures, suspension of persons involved in unfair acts, and, if appropriate, the reversal of a game’s result or the rescheduling of a game, either from the beginning or from the point at which the extraordinary act occurred. In the event of rescheduling a game, the Commissioner will be guided by the procedures specified in 17-1-5–11, above. In all cases, the Commissioner will conduct a full investigation, including the opportunity for hearings, use of game video, and any other procedure the Commissioner deems appropriate. 
67 
RULE 18 GUIDELINES FOR CAPTAINS 
SECTION 1 GUIDELINES FOR CAPTAINS 
ARTICLE 1. NUMBER OF CAPTAINS. One hour and thirty minutes prior to kickoff: Respective coaches designate a maximum of six captains per team. 
ARTICLE 2. COIN TOSS: 
	.	(a)  Up to six captains per team can participate in the coin toss ceremony (active, inactive, or honorary); only one captain from the visiting team (or a captain designated by the Referee if there is no home team) can declare the choice of the coin toss.  
	.	(b)  The team that won the toss may then have only one captain declare its option.  
	.	(c)  The team that lost the coin toss may then have only one captain declare its option.  
ARTICLE 3. CHOICE ON PENALTY OPTION: Only one captain is permitted to indicate the team’s penalty option. 
ARTICLE 4. CHANGE OF CAPTAINS: 
(a) The coach has the prerogative of informing the Referee when he wishes to make a change in team captains. (b) A captain who is leaving can inform the Referee which player will act as captain in his place when he is substituted for. (c) When a captain leaves the game, the incoming substitute is permitted to inform the Referee which player the respective 
coach has designated as captain. 
Note: A captain on the field has no authority to request a change of fellow team captain when that captain remains on the field. 
68 
RULE 19 OFFICIALS 
SECTION 1 OFFICIALS 
ARTICLE 1. GAME OFFICIALS. The game shall be played under the supervision of seven officials: the Referee, Umpire, Down Judge, Line Judge, Field Judge, Side Judge, and Back Judge. In the absence of seven officials, the crew is to be rearranged according to the remaining members of the crew. 
ARTICLE 2. JURISDICTION. The officials’ jurisdiction begins 100 minutes before the scheduled kickoff and ends when the Referee declares the final score. 
ARTICLE 3. REFEREE’S AUTHORITY. The Referee is to have general oversight and control of the game. The Referee is the final authority for the score. If there is a disagreement between members of the crew regarding the number of down, any decision, or the application, enforcement, or interpretation of a rule, the Referee’s decision will be final. The Referee’s decisions upon all matters not specifically placed under the jurisdiction of other officials by rule are final. 
ARTICLE 4. RESPONSIBILITIES AND MECHANICS. Officiating responsibilities and mechanics are specified in the Mechanics Manual, published annually by the National Football League. 
SECTION 2 SUPPORT FROM NFL OFFICIATING STAFF 
The Replay Official and designated members of the Officiating department at the League office may consult with the on-field officials to provide objective information regarding on-field rulings and the correct application of playing rules. In addition, if the designated members of the Officiating department determine that a foul for a football or non-football act called on the field is flagrant, then they can instruct the on-field officiating crew to disqualify the player(s) who committed the foul. Those players who were not penalized, but who engaged in football or non-football acts that were determined to be flagrant and directly related to the foul called on the field, may also be disqualified by designated members of the Officiating department. A penalty will be assessed when a player was not penalized by on-field officials but was subsequently disqualified pursuant to this Section. The determination that a foul is flagrant must be based on the available video, and the designated members of the Officiating department must instruct the officiating crew to disqualify the identified player(s) before the ball is next legally put in play. 
69 
Distance Penalties 
Loss of Five Yards 
  
Delay of game ............................................................................ 4-6 Encroachment ......................................................................... 7-4-3 False start ...............................................................................7-4-2 Holding (defense)................................................................. 12-1-6 Illegal contact .......................................................................... 8-4-4 Illegal formation (free kick)......................................................6-1-3 Illegal formation (scrimmage down) ........................................ 7-5-1 Illegal formation (scrimmage kick)...........................................9-1-3 Illegal forward handing............................................................8-7-4 Illegal kick................................................................................6-1-1 Illegal motion...........................................................................7-4-8 Illegal shift ............................................................................... 7-4-7 Illegal snap ................................................................... 7-6-3, 7-6-4 Illegal substitution............................................... 4-7-2, 5-2-8, 5-3-2 Illegal touching of a forward pass ...........................................8-1-8 Illegally touching of a free kick ................................................ 6-2-4 Illegal use of hands by defense.............................................12-1-7 Ineligible player downfield on kick...........................................9-1-2 Ineligible player downfield on pass .........................................8-3-1 Invalid fair catch signal..........................................................10-2-2 Kicking team player voluntarily out of bounds.........................9-1-5 Neutral zone infraction ............................................................ 7-4-4 Offside ..................................................................................... 7-4-5 Punt, drop kick, or placekick from beyond the line..................9-1-1 Running into kicker..............................................................12-2-12 Second excess team timeout after two-minute warning .........4-5-4 Team timeout called when not allowed...................................4-5-1 Too many players on the field.................................................5-1-1 Voluntarily going out of bounds on free kick ........................... 6-1-3 
Loss of Ten Yards 
Assisting the runner ..............................................................12-1-4 Holding (offense)...................................................................12-1-3 Illegal batting.........................................................................12-5-1 Illegal blocking or use of hands (free kick).............. 6-2-1-Item 2(c) Illegal kicking.........................................................................12-5-2 Illegal use of hands (offense)................................................12-1-3 Illegal block in the back.........................................................12-1-3 Offensive pass interference ......................................... 8-5-2, 8-5-4 
Loss of Fifteen Yards 
Attempting to call excess/illegal timeout to freeze kicker..12-3-1(v) Blindside block ...................................................................... 12-2-7 Blocking a kicking team player out of bounds...................12-2-8(c) Chop block ............................................................................ 12-2-5 Clipping ................................................................................. 12-2-1 Concealing ball or using equipment to simulate ball..........12-3-1(j) Crackback block....................................................................12-2-6 Delaying the start of a half ................................................. 4-2-1(a) Disconcerting acts or signals .............................................12-3-1(i) 
Forcibly contacting a player out of bounds ....................... 12-2-8(b) Goaltending ...................................................................... 12-3-1(s) Horse-collar tackle.............................................................. 12-2-16 Illegal block after fair catch signal......................................... 10-2-2 Illegal block below the waist ................................................. 12-2-4 Illegal contact after a fair catch............................................. 10-2-3 Illegal cut block ........................................................... 8-4-5, 12-2-3 Illegal double team block ........................................ 6-2-1, Item 2(d) Illegal wedge on free kick ....................................... 6-2-1, Item 2(e) Illegally entering field.............................................................. 4-1-2 Impermissible Use of the Helmet........................................ 12-2-10 Interference with a fair catch ................................................ 10-1-1 Interference with the opportunity to make a catch................ 10-1-1 Kicker or holder simulating being roughed ........................ 12-3-1(t) Kicking player not attempting to return inbounds ............. 12-3-1(u) Leaping....................................................................... 12-3-1(o), (r) Leg whip ........................................................................... 12-2-8(a) Leverage........................................................................... 12-3-1(p) Non-player unnecessary contact or abusive language ............13-8 Peel back block .................................................................... 12-2-2 Picking up a teammate to block a kick ............................. 12-3-1(q) Player going in motion in front of bench area .................... 12-3-1(l) Prohibited contact to a defenseless player........................... 12-2-9 Prolonged or excessive celebration .................................. 12-3-1(f) Pulling opponent off a pile of players ............................... 12-2-8(h) Pushing teammate on scrimmage kick................................... 9-1-3 Removal of helmet in the field of play............................... 12-3-1(h) Repeated illegal substitutions when time is in ................. 12-3-1(m) Roughing the holder ........................................................... 12-2-13 Roughing the kicker............................................................ 12-2-12 Roughing the passer .......................................................... 12-2-11 Striking, kicking, tripping or kneeing an opponent.............. 12-2-14 Successive delay of game penalties when time in ........... 12-3-1(n) Throwing a punch, forearm, or kicking at opponent ......... 12-3-1(a) Twisting, turning or pulling of opponent’s facemask..........12-2-15 Unnecessary contact against a runner........................12-2-8(d), (f) Unnecessary contact against player on the ground ......... 12-2-8(e) Unnecessary contact to a kicker out of the play ................ 12-2-8(i) Unnecessary contact to a player out of the play .............. 12-2-8(g) Unnecessary physical contact with game official ............. 12-3-1(e) Unnecessary roughness....................................................... 12-2-8 Unsportsmanlike conduct by non-player ..................................13-1 Use of the helmet as a weapon .......................................... 12-2-17 Using abusive, threatening or insulting language............. 12-3-1(b) Using an object as a prop................................................. 12-3-1(g) Using baiting or taunting acts or words ............................ 12-3-1(c) Using substitutes or returning players to deceive............. 12-3-1(k) Violent, offensive, or sexually suggestive gesture............ 12-3-1(d) 
Loss of Down Without Yardage 
Illegal touching of forward pass by an eligible receiver who had gone out of bounds and re-established .................................. 8-1-8 
                                                                                             
70 
Loss of Down With Yardage 
Illegal batting behind the line of scrimmage..........................12-5-1 
Illegal forward handing beyond the line of scrimmage or to an ineligible receiver behind the line of scrimmage ..................... 8-7-4 
Illegal forward pass ................................................................. 8-1-2 Intentional grounding...............................................................8-2-1 Illegal kicking behind the line of scrimmage..........................12-5-2 Punt, drop kick, or placekick from beyond scrimmage............9-1-1 
Ball Placed on 1-Yard Line 
Defensive pass interference in its end zone and previous spot is outside its 2-yard line ................................................................. 8-5 
Time Penalty 
Actions to conserve time.........................................................4-7-1 
Fouling by defense, illegal touching or fair catch interfering by offense or fouling by both teams at end of half during play in which time expires (extend quarter)........................................4-8-2 
Replay Penalties 
Defensive foul on unsuccessful Try ......................................11-3-3 Double foul without change of possession............................14-5-1 
Foul by Team B that would result in a safety during Try.......11-3-3 
Score Awarded 
Palpably unfair act.................................................... 12-3-4, 13-1-7 Repeated fouling by defense to prevent score .....................12-3-2 
Safety 
Enforcement for offensive foul behind goal line ....... 11-5-1, 14-2-2 Intentional grounding in own end zone ...................................8-2-1 
Score Not Allowed 
Offending team scores after foul during down in which time expires for half (with no extension of time) ........................ 4-8-2(b) 
Unsuccessful Try 
Team A committing foul during a Try which would ordinarily result: in loss of down or in a touchback..........................................11-3-3 in loss of ball in field of play (not during a kick).....................11-3-3 Team B recovering ball ......................................................... 11-3-3 
New Series Penalties 
Team B foul during scrimmage down........................14-1-2, Item 5 
Fair catch interference ..........................................................10-1-1 Prohibited contact against a kick returner .................... 12-2-9(a)(6) 
Time Restored and Fifteen yards 
Intentional fouls to manipulate game clock .......................... 12-3-3 
Interference with opportunity to make fair catch....... 10-1-1, 10-2-2 
First down at Spot of Foul 
Defensive pass interference............................................... 8-5-2, 4 
Safety 
Ball in possession of team behind or out of bound behind own goal line and impetus from player of that team .................... 11-5-1 
Illegal touching of scrimmage kick inside five-yard line.......... 9-2-3 Fair catch interference in receiver’s end zone...................... 10-1-1 
Touchback 
Illegal touching of scrimmage kick inside five-yard line.......... 9-2-3 Fair catch interference in receiver’s end zone...................... 10-1-1 
Kickoff Out of Bounds Between Goal Lines 
Receiver’s ball at inbounds spot............................................. 6-2-3 Receiver’s ball 25 yards from spot of kick .............................. 6-2-3 
Ball Remains Dead 
Actions that delay game ......................................................... 4-6-4 Snapping before Officials assume normal position ............ 4-6-5(b) 
Ball Dead Immediately 
Committing acts designed to conserve time........................... 4-7-1 Kickers recovering free kick................................................ 6-1-4(d) 
Kickers advancing after recovery of a scrimmage kick unless behind line .................................................................... 9-3-1, 9-3-2 
Any kick touching receiver’s goal post or cross bar unless scoring field goal .................................................. 6-1-5(c), 9-4-2, 11-6-2(d) 
Official sounding whistle .................................................... 7-2-1(m) Catch after fair catch signal.................................................. 10-2-3 
Penalty Enforced From Goal Line 
Spot of enforcement behind other team’s goal line .............. 14-2-2 
Runner crosses opponent’s goal line and spot of enforcing foul by teammate during run is behind defense goal line................. 14-2-2 
Penalty Enforced on Next Free Kick 
Personal foul, unsportsmanlike conduct foul, or palpably unfair act committed during opponent scoring play.............................. 14-2-3 
 
Miscellaneous Situations 
Fair Catch Awarded 
                
Scoring Penalties 
Try 
                       
Combination Penalties 
Loss of Ball and Fifteen Yards 
  
71 

              
123 
TOUCHDOWN, FIELD GOAL, or SUCCESSFUL TRY Both arms extended above head. 
SAFETY 
Palms together above head. 
FIRST DOWN 
Arms pointed toward defensive team’s goal. 
           
456 
CROWD NOISE, DEAD BALL, or 
NEUTRAL ZONE ESTABLISHED 
One arm above head with an open hand. With fist closed: Fourth Down. 
BALL ILLEGALLY TOUCHED, KICKED, OR BATTED Fingertips tap both shoulders. 
72 
TIMEOUT 
Hands crisscrossed above head. Same signal followed by placing one hand on top of cap: 
Same signal followed by arm swung at side: Touchback. 
            
789 
NO TIMEOUT or TIME IN WITH WHISTLE Full arm circled to simulate moving clock. 
DELAY OF GAME OFFENSE/DEFENSE or EXCESS TIMEOUT Folded arms. 
FALSE START, ILLEGAL FORMATION, KICKOFF OR SAFETY KICK OUT OF BOUNDS, or KICKING TEAM PLAYER VOLUNTARILY OUT OF BOUNDS DURING A PUNT Forearms rotated over and over in front of body. 
            
10 11 12 
PERSONAL FOUL 
One wrist striking the other above head. Same signal followed by swinging leg: Roughing Kicker. 
Same signal followed by raised arm swinging forward: Roughing Passer. 
Same signal followed by grasping facemask: MAJOR Facemask. 
HOLDING 
Grasping one wrist, the fist clenched, in front of chest. 
73 
ILLEGAL USE OF HANDS, ARMS, OR BODY Grasping one wrist, the hand open and facing forward, in front of chest. 
              
13 14 15 
PENALTY REFUSED, INCOMPLETE PASS, PLAY OVER, or MISSED GOAL Hands shifted in horizontal plane. 
PASS BOBBLED INBOUNDS AND CAUGHT OUT OF BOUNDS Hands up and down in front of chest (following incomplete pass signal). 
ILLEGAL FORWARD PASS 
One hand waved behind back followed by loss of down signal (23) when appropriate. 
             
16 17 18 
INTENTIONAL GROUNDING OF PASS Parallel arms waved in a diagonal plane across body. Followed by loss of down signal (23). 
INTERFERENCE WITH FORWARD PASS or FAIR CATCH Hands open and extended forward from shoulders with hands vertical. 
INVALID FAIR-CATCH SIGNAL 
One hand waved above head. 
74 
              
19 20 21 
INELIGIBLE RECEIVER or INELIGIBLE MEMBER OF KICKING TEAM DOWNFIELD Right hand touching top of cap. 
ILLEGAL CONTACT 
One open hand extended forward. 
OFFSIDE, ENCROACHMENT, OR NEUTRAL ZONE INFRACTION Hands on hips. 
               
22 23 24 
ILLEGAL MOTION AT SNAP 
Horizontal arc with one hand. 
LOSS OF DOWN 
Both hands held behind head. 
INTERLOCKING INTERFERENCE, PUSHING, or HELPING RUNNER Pushing movement of hands to front with arms downward. 
75 
                  
25 26 27 
TOUCHING A FORWARD PASS OR SCRIMMAGE KICK Diagonal motion of one hand across another. 
UNSPORTSMANLIKE CONDUCT Arms outstretched, palms down. 
ILLEGAL BLOCK BELOW THE WAIST, ILLEGAL CUT Both hands striking front of thigh preceded by personal foul signal (10). 
CHOP BLOCK 
Both hands striking side of thighs preceded by personal foul signal (10). 
CLIPPING 
One hand striking back of calf preceded by personal foul signal (10). 
                   
28 29 30 
ILLEGAL CRACKBACK 
Strike of an open right hand against the right mid thigh preceded by personal foul signal (10). 
PLAYER DISQUALIFIED 
Ejection signal. 
TRIPPING 
Repeated action of right foot in back of left heel. 
76 
             
31 32 33 
UNCATCHABLE FORWARD PASS Palm of right hand held parallel to ground above head and moved back and forth. 
ILLEGAL SUBSTITUTION, 12 MEN IN OFFENSIVE HUDDLE, or TOO MANY MEN ON THE FIELD Both hands on top of head. 
FACEMASK 
Grasping motion with one hand near face. 
              
34 35 36 
ILLEGAL SHIFT RESET PLAY CLOCK— Horizontal arcs with two hands. 25 SECONDS 
Pump one arm vertically. 
RESET PLAY CLOCK— 40 SECONDS Pump two arms vertically. 
77 
PENALTY 
Chop Block Clipping Defensive Delay of Game Defensive Holding Defensive Offside Defensive Pass Interference Defensive Too Many Men on Field Delay of Game Delay of Kickoff Disqualification DSQ Encroachment ENC Facemask FMM 
Fair Catch Interference False Start Horse Collar Illegal Bat 
Illegal Blindside Block Illegal Block Above the Waist Illegal Contact Illegal Crackback Illegal Cut Illegal Double Team Block Illegal Formation Illegal Forward Handoff Illegal Forward Pass Illegal Kick/Kicking Loose Ball Illegal Motion Illegal Peel Back Illegal Punt 
FCI FST HC BAT BLI IBW ICT ICB ICU IDT ILF IFH IFP KIK ILM IPB IPU 
Unnecessary Roughness Unsportsmanlike Conduct 
UNR UNS 
TABLE OF FOUL CODES 
FOUL CODE 
PENALTY 
Illegal Shift Illegal Substitution Illegal Touch—Kick Illegal Touch—Pass Illegal Use of Hands Impermissible Use of Helmet Ineligible Downfield Kick Ineligible Downfield Pass Intentional Grounding Invalid Fair Catch Signal Kick Catch Interference Kickoff Out of Bounds Leaping LEA Leverage LEV Low Block LBL Neutral Zone Infraction NZI Offensive Holding OH Offensive Offside OOF Offensive Pass Interference OPI Offensive Too Many Men on Field OTM Offside on Free Kick OFK Player Out of Bounds on Kick POK Roughing the Kicker RRK Roughing the Passer RPS Running into the Kicker RNK Taunting TAU Tripping TRP 
CHB CLP DOD DH DOF DPI DTM DOG DOK 
ISH ILS ITK ITP ILH UOH IDK IDP ING IFC KCI KOB 
TEAM ABBREVIATION CODES 
Arizona Cardinals ARZ Atlanta Falcons ATL Baltimore Ravens BLT Buffalo Bills BUF Carolina Panthers CAR Chicago Bears CHI Cincinnati Bengals CIN Cleveland Browns CLV Dallas Cowboys DAL Denver Broncos DEN Detroit Lions DET Green Bay Packers GB Houston Texans HST Indianapolis Colts IND Jacksonville Jaguars JAX Kansas City Chiefs KC 
Las Vegas Raiders Los Angeles Chargers Los Angeles Rams Miami Dolphins Minnesota Vikings New England Patriots New Orleans Saints New York Giants New York Jets Philadelphia Eagles Pittsburgh Steelers San Francisco 49ers Seattle Seahawks Tampa Bay Buccaneers Tennessee Titans Washington Commanders 
LV LAC LA MIA MIN NE NO NYG NYJ PHI PIT SF SEA TB TEN WAS 
78 
FOUL CODE 
